## 108

**離散數學 $1 \sim 5$ 題，每題 $5$ 分，共 $25$ 分；單選題。**

### Problem 1

Which one of the following statements is unlikely a proposition?

(A) 貨賣得出去，人進得來，高雄發大財。
(B) 冷泉加熱就變溫泉了。
(C) 垃圾不分藍綠。
(D) 如果我當選，明年元旦起市民免費參觀花博。
(E) 我們不接受一國兩制。

### Problem 2

Which of the following statements about Fibonacci numbers is incorrect?

(A) The first two numbers of Fibonacci numbers are commonly defined as $0$ and $1$, but it could be defined differently.
(B) We can find a lower bound of Fibonacci numbers that grows linearly.
(C) We can find a lower bound of Fibonacci numbers that grows exponentially.
(D) We can find an upper bound of Fibonacci numbers that grows linearly.
(E) We can find an upper bound of Fibonacci numbers that grows exponentially.

### Problem 3

Which is the answer of $3^{302} \mod 11$?

(A) $1$ &emsp; (B) $3$ &emsp; (C) $6$ &emsp; (D) $9$ &emsp; (E) None of the above.

### Problem 4

Consider the divisibility relation (i.e., $|$ ) and the poset $R = (S, |)$, where $S = \{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9\}$. We can conclude that:

(A) $R$ is a total order.
(B) $R$ does not have a maximal element.
(C) $R$ has a greatest lower bound.
(D) $R$ is a lattice.
(E) None of the above.

### Problem 5

Consider Figure X below. Assume that Dijkstra's algorithm is used to find the shortest path starting from node $a$. Which of the following statements is correct?

=== 圖片描述：一個加權有向圖（Figure X），包含節點 $a, b, c, d, e, f, g, z$。邊與權重如下：$a \to b$ 權重 $4$，$a \to c$ 權重 $3$，$b \to d$ 權重 $5$，$b \to c$ 權重 $2$（從 b 到 c），$c \to b$ 權重 $3$（從 c 到 b），$c \to e$ 權重 $6$，$d \to e$ 權重 $1$，$d \to f$ 權重 $5$，$e \to g$ 權重 $5$，$f \to z$ 權重 $7$，$f \to g$ 權重 $2$，$g \to z$ 權重 $4$。圖呈現從左到右的結構，$a$ 在最左側，$z$ 在最右側。 ===

(A) The cost of the shortest path from $a$ to $z$ is $17$.
(B) In Dijkstra's algorithm, after adding nodes $a$ and $c$, the next node to be added will be node $d$.
(C) The shortest path must contain the smallest number of edges.
(D) For each destination, there is only one possible shortest path.
(E) None of the above.

**離散數學 $6 \sim 10$ 題，每題 $5$ 分，共 $25$ 分；多選題，答錯每選項倒扣 $1$ 分。倒扣到該大題 $0$ 分為止**

### Problem 6

Let $R$ be a **total order** relation, what following logical statements are true?

(A) $\forall x, y, (\neg R(x,y)) \to R(y,x)$
(B) $\forall x, y, (R(x,y) \land R(y,x)) \to (x = y)$
(C) $\exists x, \forall y,\ R(x,y)$
(D) $\forall x, y, (R^{-1}(x,y) \lor R^{-1}(y,x))$
(E) $\forall x, \neg R^{-1}(x,x)$

### Problem 7

We want to analyze the time complexity of the procedure $P$ with the listed pseudo-code. Suppose procedure Q take $\theta(\sqrt{m})$ time to divide an array into three equal size sub-arrays, where $m$ is the size of input; each statement line counts $1$ step.

```
Procedure P( A[a₁, a₂, ..., aₙ])
B₁, B₂, B₃ are initially empty arrays.
1. if n < 3 exit.
2. else call Q (A); /* and get B₁, B₂, B₃*/
   /* each is size of n/3 */
3. call P(B₁);
4. call P(B₃);
5. return;
```

Suppose the size of input array, $n$, is a number of power of $3$, What of the following options are true about the number of steps ($p(n)$) and complexity function($f_p$) of the procedure $P$ in the question above? ($c_i$ are constants in the following equations)

(A) $p(n) = p(n/3) + c_1 n^2 + c_2$
(B) $p(n) = 2p(n/3) + c_1 n^{1/2} + c_2$
(C) $f_p = O(n^{1/2})$
(D) $f_p = O(n^{1/2} \log n)$
(E) $f_p = \theta(n^{\log_3 2})$

### Problem 8

For integers $i$ and $j$ define $i \sim j$ if $2a + 3b = 5n$ for some integer $n$. What of the following claims about the relation "$\sim$" are true?

(A) $\sim$ is not reflexive.
(B) $\sim$ is not symmetric.
(C) $\sim$ is not transitive.
(D) $\sim$ is an equivalence relation.
(E) $\sim$ is a partial order.

### Problem 9

Let $f: A \to B$ and $g: B \to C$ be functions. What following statements are true?

(A) if $g \circ f$ is one-to-one, so is $f$.
(B) if $g \circ f$ is one-to-one, so is $g$.
(C) if $g \circ f$ is onto, so is $f$.
(D) if $g \circ f$ is onto, so is $g$.
(E) if $g \circ f$ is a bijection, so are $g$ and $f$.

### Problem 10

What parts are true when using generating function to solve the recurrence relation:
$\forall n \geq 2, a_n = -6a_{n-1} + 7a_{n-2},\ a_0 = -5, a_1 = 3.$ ($g(z)$ is the generating function)

(A) $g(z) = -(33z + 5)/(1 + 6z - 7z^2)$
(B) $g(z) = (-1/(1+7z)) - (4/(1-z))$
(C) $a_n = -4 - (-7)^n$
(D) $a_n = 8n - 5$
(E) none of the above.

**線性代數 $11 \sim 12$ 題，每題 $5$ 分，共 $10$ 分；多選題（每一小題答對給 $1$ 分、答錯扣 $1$ 分、不答 $0$ 分）**

### Problem 11

Which of the following are correct?

(A) Eigenvalues of a triangular matrix are its diagonal elements.
(B) If $A$ is invertible, then so is $A^T$.
(C) If $A$ and $B$ are invertible, then so is $AB$.
(D) It is possible that $AB \neq BA$.
(E) It is possible to have real-valued matrix $A$ such that $A^2 = -I$.

### Problem 12

Let $A$ and $B$ be two matrices and $x$ be a column vector. Which of the following sub-problems are correct?

(A) A symmetric matrix has real eigenvalues and is diagonalizable.
(B) If $A$ is diagonalizable and invertible, then $A^{-1}$ is also diagonalizable.
(C) If $A$ and $B$ are $m \times n$ matrices, and $A$ is invertible, then $AB$ is similar to $BA$.
(D) If $A$ and $B$ are diagonalizable, then $AB$ is also diagonalizable.
(E) If $A$ is a symmetric $n \times n$ matrix whose entries are all positive, then the quadratic form $x^T A x$ is positive definite.

**線性代數 $13 \sim 15$ 題，每題 $5$ 分，共 $15$ 分；單選題。**

### Problem 13

Given $A = \begin{bmatrix} 0.6 & 0.4 & 0.3 \\ 0.4 & 0.9 & 0.2 \\ 0.3 & 0.2 & 0.8 \end{bmatrix}$. What is the sum of all $A$'s eigenvalues?

(A) $2.5$ &emsp; (B) $2.3$ &emsp; (C) $2.4$ &emsp; (D) $2.7$ &emsp; (E) $2.1$

### Problem 14

If $A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\ 2 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\ 3 & 2 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 1 & 2 & 3 & 1 & 0 \\ 1 & 1 & 1 & 1 & 1 \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 & 2 & 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 2 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$, what is the solution of $A \begin{bmatrix} x_1 \\ x_2 \\ x_3 \\ x_4 \\ x_5 \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} 1.5 \\ 7.5 \\ 15.5 \\ 14.0 \\ 4.0 \end{bmatrix}$?

(A) $\begin{bmatrix} 0.5 \\ 0.5 \\ 1.5 \\ 2.5 \\ -0.5 \end{bmatrix}$ &emsp; (B) $\begin{bmatrix} -0.5 \\ -1.5 \\ 0.5 \\ -0.5 \\ 2.5 \end{bmatrix}$ &emsp; (C) $\begin{bmatrix} 1.5 \\ -0.5 \\ -1.5 \\ 0.5 \\ 1.5 \end{bmatrix}$ &emsp; (D) $\begin{bmatrix} 0.5 \\ 1.5 \\ 2.5 \\ -0.5 \\ -1.5 \end{bmatrix}$ &emsp; (E) $\begin{bmatrix} 1.5 \\ 2.5 \\ -0.5 \\ -1.5 \\ 0.5 \end{bmatrix}$

### Problem 15

What is the inverse of the matrix $\begin{bmatrix} -4 & 0 & 5 \\ -3 & 3 & 5 \\ -1 & 2 & 2 \end{bmatrix}$?

(A) $\begin{bmatrix} 1 & -2 & -2 \\ 0 & 1 & \frac{1}{3} \\ 0 & -8 & -3 \end{bmatrix}$ &emsp; (B) $\begin{bmatrix} -4 & 10 & -15 \\ 1 & -3 & 5 \\ -3 & 8 & -12 \end{bmatrix}$ &emsp; (C) $\begin{bmatrix} -6 & 16 & -25 \\ 1 & -3 & 5 \\ -3 & 8 & -12 \end{bmatrix}$ &emsp; (D) $\begin{bmatrix} 1 & -2 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$ &emsp; (E) $\begin{bmatrix} 4 & -6 & -15 \\ -1 & 3 & 5 \\ 3 & 8 & -12 \end{bmatrix}$

**線性代數 $16 \sim 20$ 題，每題 $5$ 分，共 $25$ 分。多選題（每一小題答對給 $1$ 分、答錯扣 $1$ 分、不答 $0$ 分）倒扣到該大題 $0$ 分為止**

### Problem 16

If $A$ is square matrix with real entries and has eigenvalue $\lambda$. Which are correct?

(A) If $\lambda$ is a complex number $a+ib$, then $a-ib$ may be another eigenvalue.
(B) If $\lambda$ is a complex number, then the corresponding eigenvector must be a complex vector.
(C) $A$ is symmetric, then $\lambda$ is real.
(D) $A$ is symmetric, all eigenspaces are orthogonal.
(E) The eigenvalues of matrix ($A^T A$) are arbitrary real number.

### Problem 17

If $\hat{x}$ is the least-squares solution of the linear system $Ax = b$. Which are correct?

(A) $\hat{x} = (A^T A)^{-1} A^T b$.
(B) If $(A^T A)$ is not invertible, then $\hat{x}$ is not existed.
(C) $\hat{x}$ is not unique.
(D) If $b \in \text{Col}\ A$, then $\hat{x} = x$.
(E) $\hat{x} = R^{-1} Q^T b$ for any $A$.

### Problem 18

If $A$ is an matrix. Which are wrong?

(A) $A$ is invertible, thus $A = P\ D\ P^{-1}$, where $D$ is a diagonal matrix.
(B) $A$ is not a square matrix, thus $A$ can not be $Q\ R$ factorization.
(C) $A$ is not symmetric, thus $A$ can not be $P\ D\ P^T$ factorization.
(D) $A$ has $n$ distinct eigenvalues, thus $A = \lambda_1 u_1 u_1^T + \lambda_2 u_2 u_2^T + \ldots + \lambda_n u_n u_n^T$.
(E) $A$ is symmetric, thus $A = U\ \Sigma\ V^T$ (singular value decomposition).

### Problem 19

What are the necessary conditions for a matrix can be Cholesky factorization.

(A) square matrix.
(B) linearly independent columns.
(C) enough linearly independent eigenvectors.
(D) all eigenvalues are positive.
(E) symmetric matrix.

### Problem 20

Diagonalize matrix $A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 1 & 5 \\ 1 & 5 & 1 \\ 5 & 1 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$; that is to find matrices $P$ and $D$ such that $A = PDP^T$. Which values are **not** in $P$ or $D$ matrices?

(A) $1/\sqrt{3}$ &emsp; (B) $-1/\sqrt{8}$ &emsp; (C) $2/\sqrt{8}$ &emsp; (D) $-1/2$ &emsp; (E) $1/3$

## 109

**一、$1 \sim 30$ 題，每一題答對給 $1$ 分、答錯倒扣 $1$ 分。**

True or False.

$A$, $B$, and $C$ are matrices, $r$ is a scalar.

### Problem 1

$AB = BA$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 2

$AB = AC \Rightarrow B = C$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 3

$AB = 0 \Rightarrow A = 0$ or $B = 0$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 4

$(A\ B)^T = A^T B^T$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 5

$(rA)^{-1} = r A^{-1}$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 6

$\det(A + B) = \det A + \det B$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 7

$\det(A\ B) = \det A \det B$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 8

$\det(A\ B) = \det(B A)$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 9

$\det(rA) = r \det A$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 10

$\det(A^{-1}) = (-1) \det A$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

$Ax = b$ is a consistent linear system.

### Problem 11

If $b \neq 0$, the solution set may be a subspace. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 12

If $b \neq 0$, the solution set is not a subspace. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 13

If $b = 0$, the solution set may be or may not be a subspace. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 14

If $b = 0$, the solution set is not a subspace. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 15

If $b = 0$, the solution set is exactly a subspace. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

$A$ and $B$ are two invertible matrices. If $A$ is similar to $B$.

### Problem 16

$\det(A) = \det(B)$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 17

$A^2$ is similar to $B^2$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 18

$A^T$ is similar to $B^T$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 19

$A^{-1}$ is similar to $B^{-1}$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 20

$AB$ is similar to $BA$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

If $n \times n$ matrix $A$ is diagonalizable, then

### Problem 21

$A$ has $n$ distinct eigenvalues. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 22

$A$ has $n$ linearly independent columns. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 23

$A^T$ and $A^{-1}$ are all diagonalizable. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 24

$A$ has no zero eigenvalues. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 25

$A$ has $n$ linearly independent eigenspaces. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

Let $A$ be an $m \times n$ matrix with orthogonal columns.
If $W$ is a subset of $R^n$ and $W^{\perp}$ is the orthogonal complement of $W$.

### Problem 26

$\text{Nul}\ A$ is the orthogonal complement of $\textbf{Row}\ A$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 27

$W^{\perp}$ is always a subspace. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 28

$(W^{\perp})^{\perp} = W$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 29

If $v$ and $w$ is orthogonal, then $Av$ and $Aw$ is orthogonal. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 30

$W \cup W^{\perp} = R^n$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

**二、$31 \sim 40$ 題，每一題答對給 $2$ 分、答錯倒扣 $2$ 分。**

True or False.

$A$ is a linear-transformation matrix in the standard coordinate system.
If the coordinate system is changed to $\beta$ coordinate system,
to find the transformation matrix (called the $\beta$-matrix) relative to $\beta$ for
the transformation $x \mapsto Ax$, where $\beta = \{b_1, b_2, b_3\}$,

$$
A = \begin{bmatrix} -7 & -48 & -16 \\ 1 & 14 & 6 \\ -3 & -45 & -19 \end{bmatrix},\ b_1 = \begin{Bmatrix} -3 \\ 1 \\ -3 \end{Bmatrix},\ b_2 = \begin{Bmatrix} -2 \\ 1 \\ -3 \end{Bmatrix},\ b_3 = \begin{Bmatrix} 3 \\ -1 \\ 0 \end{Bmatrix}.
$$

### Problem 31

$0, -1$ are in the $\beta$-matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 32

$1, -3$ are in the $\beta$-matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 33

$-2, -4$ are in the $\beta$-matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 34

$-6, -7$ are in the $\beta$-matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 35

$8, -9$ are in the $\beta$-matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

Find a $QR$ factorization of matrix $\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 3 & 5 \\ 1 & 1 & 0 \\ 1 & 1 & 2 \\ 1 & 3 & 3 \end{bmatrix}$.

### Problem 36

$1$ is **not** in $R$ matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 37

$3$ is **not** in $R$ matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 38

$5$ is **not** in $R$ matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 39

$7$ is **not** in $R$ matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 40

$9$ is **not** in $R$ matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

**三、$41 \sim 50$ 題，每題 $5$ 分，單選題，答錯不倒扣**

### Problem 41

Four friends have been identified as suspects for an unauthorized access into a computer system. They have made statements to the investigating authorities. 小英 said "神掌 did it." 韓總 said "I did not do it." 神掌 said "柯 P did it." 柯 P said "神掌 lied when he said that I did it." If the authorities also know that exactly one is lying, who did it?

(A) 小英.
(B) 韓總.
(C) 神掌.
(D) 柯 P.
(E) 郭董.

### Problem 42

Which of the following statement is most inappropriate?

(A) There exists a bijection function from $\mathbb{N}$ to $\mathbb{Z}$.
(B) There exists a bijection function from $\mathbb{Z}$ to $\mathbb{Q}$.
(C) There exists a bijection function from $\mathbb{Q}$ to $\mathbb{R}$.
(D) There exists a bijection function from $\mathbb{N}$ to $\mathbb{Q}$.
(E) There exists a bijection function from $\mathbb{Z}$ to $\mathbb{N}$.

### Problem 43

Which of the following statement is most inappropriate?

(A) $3^{302} \mod 5 = 4$.
(B) $3^{302} \mod 7 = 2$.
(C) $3^{302} \mod 11 = 9$.
(D) $3^{302} \mod 385 = 9$.
(E) None of the above.

### Problem 44

A binary relation R on a set of $3$ elements is represented by the matrix $\begin{bmatrix} 0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$.

Which of the following statement is most inappropriate?

(A) R is antisymmetric.
(B) The reflexive closure of R is $\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$.
(C) The symmetric closure of R is $\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$.
(D) The transitive closure of R is $\begin{bmatrix} 0 & 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$.
(E) R is an equivalent relation.

### Problem 45

Two undirected graphs, $G_1 = (V_1, E_1)$ and $G_2 = (V_2, E_2)$, are isomorphic if

(A) $|V_1| = |V_2|$.
(B) $|E_1| = |E_2|$.
(C) The number of vertices with any given degree is the same in both $G_1$ and $G_2$.
(D) For every subgraph of $G_1$, there is a subgraph of $G_2$ that is isomorphic to it.
(E) All of the above must hold.

### Problem 46

Which statement **cannot** be supported by Gödel's incompleteness theorem?

(a) "Graph isomorphism problem is NP-hard in general".
(b) "No single Artificial Intelligent algorithm can solve all humans' problems".
(c) "The cloud computing platform is not capable enough to solve all big-data tasks".
(d) "There are problems which cannot be calculated by Turing machine".
(e) "We cannot expect to construct a large enough Database to support analyzing all aspects of social networks".

### Problem 47

Which operator or function is associative?

(a) Set difference ($-$) on sets.
(b) Division ($/$) on numbers.
(c) Implication ($\to$) on propositions.
(d) Greatest common divisor(GCD) on integers.
(e) Cartesian product ($\times$) on sets.

### Problem 48

We will evaluate the time complexity of a recursive algorithm A with input of $n$ items. Algorithm $A$ works as follow: when input size is $m$, the algorithm will first use $\theta(\sqrt{m})$ steps to prepare and divide the input into $4$ roughly equal-size subsets; for each size $m/4$ subset, recursively call $A$; finally it use $\theta(\sqrt{m})$ steps to merge all $4$ partial results to get the final solution. What is the time complexity for this algorithm?

(a) $\theta(n)$ &emsp; (b) $\theta(n \log n)$ &emsp; (c) $\theta(n^2)$ &emsp; (d) $\theta(\sqrt{n})$ &emsp; (e) $\theta(\sqrt{n} \log n)$

### Problem 49

A restaurant provides different ways to accept reservation of ordered seats. For any individual ($1$ person), he/she can make reservation by email or through the web page. For any party of $2$ persons, they can use phone, email, or web page to reserve. How many different ways for this restaurant to make reservation of $n$ ordered seats?

(a) $\frac{5}{12} 3^n + \frac{3}{4} (-1)^{n+1}$
(b) $\frac{1}{12} (-3)^n + \frac{9}{4}$
(c) $3^n + (-1)^n$
(d) $\frac{3}{2} 2^n + (-1)^n$
(e) $\frac{3}{4} 3^n + \frac{1}{4} (-1)^n$

### Problem 50

We define that a person is "happy" if he is liked by at least $3$ other people. Suppose in a group of $10$ people, everyone likes at least $4$ other persons. What following conclusion can be reached?

(a) At least $4$ persons are happy.
(b) At most $6$ persons are not happy.
(c) It is impossible that no one is happy.
(d) "like" cannot be a symmetric relation.
(e) For each person, the number of persons who like him cannot be all different among $10$ people.

## 110

**離散數學多選題（$50$ 分）－第一題到第十題為，每題五分（ABCDE 每一選項單獨計分）答對每一選項的分數為 $1$ 分，答錯每一選項倒扣 $1$ 分，倒扣至離散數學多選題整大題 $0$ 分為止。**

### Problem 1

Which of the following logic equivalence statements are incorrect?

(A) $\forall x P(x) \land \forall x Q(x) \equiv \forall x (P(x) \land Q(x))$.
(B) $\forall x P(x) \lor \forall x Q(x) \equiv \forall x (P(x) \lor Q(x))$.
(C) $\exists x P(x) \land \exists x Q(x) \equiv \exists x (P(x) \land Q(x))$.
(D) $\exists x P(x) \lor \exists x Q(x) \equiv \exists x (P(x) \lor Q(x))$.
(E) $\forall x (P(x) \to A) \equiv \forall x P(x) \to A$. (Assume that $x$ does not occur as a free variable in $A$ and the domain of $x$ is nonempty.)

### Problem 2

小英、江哥、柯 P 和 3Q 哥在聊離散數學，以下哪幾句敘述有誤？

(A) 小英對江哥說：從我的黨員到你的黨員間存在有 injective function 的映射，所以我的黨比你的黨大。
(B) 柯 P 對小英說：從我的黨員到你的黨員間存在有 bijective function 的映射，所以我的黨比你的黨大。
(C) 江哥說：從自然數集$\mathbb{N}$到我的黨員間存在有 surjective function 的映射，所以我的黨比小英跟柯 P 兩個黨加起來還大。
(D) 3Q 哥對江哥說：從有理數集$\mathbb{Q}$到我的黨員間存在有 surjective function 的映射，所以我的黨才是最大的。
(E) 以上皆是。

### Problem 3

Which of the following statements about integers are incorrect?

(A) If $\gcd(a, b) = 1$, then for any non-zero integer $n$, there is a pair of integers $p$ and $q$ such that $pa + qb = n$.
(B) The inverse of $p$ module $q$ exists only when $\gcd(p, q) = 1$ and $q > 1$.
(C) The system $\begin{cases} x \equiv a_1 \pmod{m_1} \\ x \equiv a_2 \pmod{m_2} \\ \vdots \\ x \equiv a_n \pmod{m_n} \end{cases}$ has a unique solution modulo $m$, where $m_i$ are primes and $m = m_1 m_2 \cdots m_n$.
(D) If $p$ is prime, then for every integer $a$ we have $a^{p-1} \equiv 1 \pmod{p}$.
(E) In RSA, if Alice wants to send a secret message to Bob, Alice uses Bob's private key to encrypt the message and then send the ciphertext message to Bob. After Bob receives the ciphertext, Bob can use his public key to decrypt the ciphertext.

### Problem 4

Figure 1 shows the Hasse diagram of a binary relation $R$. Which of the following statements are incorrect?

=== 圖片描述：一個 Hasse 圖（Figure 1），表示二元關係 $R$。圖中有節點 $a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m$。最底層（最小元素）為 $a, b, c$。$d$ 在 $a$ 和 $b$ 之上。$e$ 在 $b$ 之上。$f$ 在 $c$ 之上。$g$ 在 $c$ 之上（或 $f$ 旁邊）。$h$ 在 $d$ 和 $e$ 之間。$i$ 在 $d$ 之上。$j$ 在 $i$ 之上。$k$ 在 $h$ 和 $g$ 之間。$l$ 在 $j$ 之上。$m$ 在 $k$ 之上。$l$ 和 $m$ 是最頂層的元素。整體結構呈現從底部 $a, b, c$ 向上延伸到頂部 $l, m$ 的偏序關係。 ===

(A) $cRh$.
(B) $mRm$.
(C) $dRa$.
(D) $a$ is a minimal element.
(E) $R$ is a lattice.

### Problem 5

Given the directed graph in Figure 2. Which of the following statements are correct?

=== 圖片描述：一個有向圖（Figure 2, Directed graph G），包含 $5$ 個節點：$a, b, c, d, e$。邊的方向如下：$b \to a$（從 b 到 a），$a \to e$（從 a 到 e），$e \to d$（從 e 到 d），$d \to b$（從 d 到 b），$b \to c$（從 b 到 c），$c \to d$（從 c 到 d）。圖中 $a$ 在左上，$b$ 在右上，$c$ 在右側，$e$ 在左下，$d$ 在下方中間。 ===

(A) G is strongly connected.
(B) G is weakly connected.
(C) G has a Euler path.
(D) G has a Hamilton path.
(E) G is a planar graph.

### Problem 6

Considering relation **R** defined as: $\{(x,y) \in \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N} \mid x$ does not have more prime factors than $y\}$, Which of the following statements are true?

(A) **R** is partial ordering.
(B) **R** is total-ordered.
(C) **R** is reflexive.
(D) **R** is an equivalence relation.
(E) Only $1$ weakly connected component in a directed graph that represents **R**.

### Problem 7

Suppose the set of "valuable" problems is V, where each problem can be considered by human beings, and there is a bijection between V and $\mathbb{R}$ (real number). Suppose the set of all A.I. softwares is S, where each software can solve exactly one problem. Each software can be represented as a long binary string (machine code). Which of the following statement are true?

(A) There is a bijection between S and $\mathbb{R}$.
(B) A.I. can solve all valuable problems, it just takes a long time to do it.
(C) Without other restrictions, $|S|$ is $\infty$.
(D) $|V| \neq |S|$, and $|V| > |S|$.
(E) In terms of solving problems, A.I. may replace human beings someday.

### Problem 8

The number of ways to buy $n$ dollars of tickets is represented by $a_n$, if only $1$-dollar and $2$-dollar bills can be used. What of the following can be the recurrence relation for our question? (initial condition: $a_0 = 1; a_1 = 1;$)

(A) $a_n = a_{n-1} + 1$.
(B) $a_n = a_{n-2} + 3$.
(C) $a_n = 2a_{n-2} + 1$.
(D) $a_n = a_{n-1} + a_{n-2}$.
(E) none of the above.

### Problem 9

About algorithm complexity, which of the following claims are true?

(A) merge sort is $\theta(n \log n)$.
(B) Euclid's algorithm to find $\gcd(a,b)$ is $\theta(\log \max(a,b))$.
(C) bubble sort is $\theta(n \log n)$.
(D) Roy-Warshall Algorithm to compute transitive closure is $\theta(n^2)$ (bit operations).
(E) traveling sales problem is a NP-hard problem.

### Problem 10

Solving the recurrence relation $a_n = a_{n-1} + 20a_{n-2}, a_0 = -1, a_1 = -1, \forall n \geq 2$, using generating function $G(z)$, which following parts are true?

(A) $G(z) = (1 + z)/(1 - z - 20z^2)$
(B) $G(z) = (-1 - z)/(1 - z - 20z^2)$
(C) $G(z) = \left(\frac{-6}{1-5z}\right) + \left(\frac{5}{1+4z}\right)$
(D) $G(z) = \left(\frac{-2/3}{1-5z}\right) + \left(\frac{-1/3}{1+4z}\right)$
(E) $a_n = \left(\frac{-2}{3} \cdot 5^n\right) + \left(\frac{-1}{3} \cdot (-4)^n\right)$

**線性代數複選題（每題 $1$ 分）－第十一題到第十五題為複選題（全對才給分）：每一題答對給 $1$ 分、答錯倒扣 $1$ 分，倒扣至線性代數複選題整大題 $0$ 分為止。（$5$ 分）**

Give the necessary conditions for matrix $A$ can be factorized (複選)

### Problem 11

$A = P\ D\ P^{-1}$.

### Problem 12

$A = Q\ R$.

### Problem 13

$A = P\ D\ P^T$.

### Problem 14

$A = \lambda_1 u_1 u_1^T + \lambda_2 u_2 u_2^T + \ldots + \lambda_n u_n u_n^T$.

### Problem 15

$A = R^T R$ (Cholesky factorization)

(A) square but non-symmetric, &emsp; (B) square and symmetric, &emsp; (C) linearly-independent columns, &emsp; (D) linearly-independent eigenvectors, &emsp; (E) positive definite

**第 $16$ 題到第 $35$ 題為線性代數單選題：每一題答對給 $1$ 分、答錯倒扣 $1$ 分，倒扣至線性代數單選題整大題 $0$ 分為止。（$20$ 分）**

If $n \times n$ matrix $A$ is diagonalizable, then

### Problem 16

$0$ is not the eigenvalue of $A$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 17

$A$ has $n$ distinct eigenvalues. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 18

$A$ is invertible. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 19

$A^T$ is also diagonalizable. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 20

The diagonalization is unique. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

Suppose $\beta = \{b_1, b_2\}$ is a basis for $V$ and $C = \{c_1, c_2, c_3\}$ is a basis for $W$. Let $T: V \to W$ be a linear transformation with the standard matrix $A$ for $T$. If

$$
\beta = \left\{ \begin{bmatrix} 1 \\ -2 \end{bmatrix}, \begin{bmatrix} 3 \\ 4 \end{bmatrix} \right\},\ C = \left\{ \begin{bmatrix} 1 \\ -1 \\ -3 \end{bmatrix}, \begin{bmatrix} -3 \\ 4 \\ 9 \end{bmatrix}, \begin{bmatrix} 2 \\ -2 \\ 4 \end{bmatrix} \right\},\ \text{and } A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 1 \\ 1 & 1 \\ 1 & 1 \end{bmatrix}.
$$

Find the transformation matrix $M$ for $T$ relative to $\beta$ and $C$.

### Problem 21

$1, 2, 4$ are in the M matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 22

$1, -2, 4$ are in the M matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 23

$1, -2, -4$ are in the M matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 24

$7, 14, 28$ are in the M matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 25

$7, -14, 28$ are in the M matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

If $A$ is a $m \times n$ matrix; $Ax = b$ is an inconsistent system and has a least-square solution $\hat{x}$.

### Problem 26

$b$ is exactly not in Col $A$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 27

$\hat{x}$ is not a unique solution. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 28

If $A^T A$ is not invertible, then the system has no solution. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 29

$A\hat{x}$ is not always in Col $A$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 30

$b - A\hat{x}$ is always in Nul $A^T$. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

If $C$ is a $n \times n$ covariance matrix, then

### Problem 31

$C$ always have $n$ orthogonal eigenvectors. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 32

$C$ always have $n$ distinct real eigenvalues. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 33

$C$ has positive and negative eigenvalues but no zero eigenvalues. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 34

$C$ can always be decomposed into $A A^T$, where $A$ is a matrix. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

### Problem 35

$C$ is exactly positive definite. &emsp; (A) True. &emsp; (B) False.

**線性代數多選題，每題 $5$ 分，每選項單獨計分，答對每一選項的分數為 $1$ 分，答錯每一選項倒扣 $1$ 分，倒扣至線性代數多選題整大題 $0$ 分為止。（$25$ 分）**

### Problem 36

Which of the following statements regarding the cost of methods for solving an $n \times n$ linear system $Ax = b$ are true?

(A) The cost of computing the LU factorization is generally proportional to $n^2$.
(B) The cost of backward substitution on a dense upper triangular matrix is generally proportional to $n^2$.
(C) If a matrix $A$ has no more than $3$ non-zero entries per row, the cost of each iteration of the Jacobi method is proportional to $n$.
(D) If a matrix $A$ has no more than $3$ non-zero entries per row, the cost of each iteration of the Jacobi method is proportional to $n^3$.
(E) None.

### Problem 37

Which of the following methods can be used for solving the system $Ax = b$, where $A$ is a symmetric, diagonally dominant, square $n \times n$ matrix?

(A) LU factorization with full pivoting.
(B) System of normal equations.
(C) Gauss-Seidel method.
(D) Jacobi method.
(E) None.

### Problem 38

Which set of vectors is a basis for $\mathbb{R}^3$

(A) $\{[1,2,3], [-1,0,1], [4,9,7]\}$
(B) $\{[1,4,7], [2,5,8], [3,6,9]\}$
(C) $\{[1,0,-1], [2,1,-1], [-2,1,4]\}$
(D) $\{[4,0,0], [0,0,5], [0,3,0]\}$
(E) All

### Problem 39

Which vectors form the basis of null($A$)?

$$
A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 1 & 3 & 1 & 6 \\ 2 & -1 & 0 & 1 & -1 \\ -3 & 2 & 1 & -2 & 1 \\ 4 & 1 & 6 & 1 & 3 \end{bmatrix}
$$

(A) $[-3, 2, 1, -1, 1]$
(B) $[-1, -2, 1, 0, 0]$
(C) $[1, -3, 0, -4, 1]$
(D) $[2, -1, 0, 1, -1]$
(E) None

### Problem 40

A python function `Fun` is designed to perform a certain matrix operation:

```python=
def FunSub(m, i, j):
    return [row[:j] + row[j+1:] for row in (m[:i] + m[i+1:])]

def Fun(m):
    if len(m) == 2:
        return m[0][0]*m[1][1] - m[0][1]*m[1][0]

    x = 0
    for c in range(len(m)):
        x += ((-1)**c)*m[0][c]*Fun(FunSub(m, 0, c))
    return x
```

What inputs make `Fun` output $0$?

(A) $\begin{bmatrix} 7 & 9 & 9 \\ 3 & 2 & 2 \\ 5 & 3 & 3 \end{bmatrix}$
(B) $\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 & 3 & 6 \\ 2 & 3 & 6 & 7 \\ 8 & 14 & 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 6 & 9 & 12 \end{bmatrix}$
(C) $\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 & 3 & 6 \\ 2 & 3 & 6 & 7 \\ 8 & 14 & 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 6 & 9 & 18 \end{bmatrix}$
(D) $\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 & 3 \\ 3 & 2 & 1 \\ 2 & 3 & 1 \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & 1 \\ 2 & 9 & 2 \\ 3 & 3 & 3 \end{bmatrix}$
(E) All

## 111

**離散數學 --- 第 $1 \sim 10$ 多選題，ABCDE 每一選項 $1$ 分，答錯一個選項倒扣 $1$ 分；答錯倒扣到第 $1 \sim 10$ 題零分為止。（每題 $5$ 分）**

### Problem 1

Let $Q(x, y)$ be the statement "$x + y = x - y$," which of the following are true?

(A) $\exists x \exists y Q(x, y)$
(B) $\forall x \exists y Q(x, y)$
(C) $\exists y \forall x Q(x, y)$
(D) $\forall y \exists x Q(x, y)$
(E) $\forall x \forall y Q(x, y)$

### Problem 2

An arm wrestler is the champion for a period of $75$ hours. (Here, by an hour, we mean a period starting from an exact hour, such as 1 p.m., until the next hour.) The arm wrestler had at least one match an hour, but no more than $125$ total matches. There is a period of consecutive hours during which

(A) the arm wrestler had exactly $2$ matches.
(B) the arm wrestler had exactly $23$ matches.
(C) the arm wrestler had exactly $24$ matches.
(D) the arm wrestler had exactly $25$ matches.
(E) All the above statements are incorrect.

### Problem 3

In the RSA public key system,

(A) its correctness is based on Fermat's theorem and Chinese remainder theorem.
(B) two large primes are chosen so that one acts as the public key and the other the private key.
(C) $(M^e)^d = (M^d)^e = M$, where $M$ represents a message, $e$ represents the public key, and $d$ the corresponding private key.
(D) if Alice wants to send a message to Bob and prove her identity, Alice first generates a hash value from the message and encrypts the hash value by her own public key and then sends the plaintext message and the encrypted hash value to Bob. After Bob receives the message, he decrypts the hash value by Alice's private key. Besides, he also generates a hash value from the plaintext message. If both values match, it proves the message comes from Alice.
(E) all of the above statements are incorrect.

### Problem 4

Let G be a connected planar simple graph with $e$ edges and $v$ vertices, then

(A) $r = e + v - 2$, where $r$ represents the number of regions in a planar representation of G.
(B) $e \leq 3v - 6$ when $v \geq 3$
(C) G has a vertex of degree not exceeding five
(D) A graph is nonplanar if it contains a subgraph homeomorphic to $K_{2,3}$
(E) A graph is nonplanar if it contains a subgraph homeomorphic to $K_5$

### Problem 5

A full $m$-ary tree with

(A) $n$ vertices has $i = (n-1)/m$ internal vertices
(B) $n$ vertices has $l = [(m-1)n + 1]/m$ leaves
(C) $i$ internal vertices has $l = (m-1)i + 1$ leaves
(D) $l$ leaves has $n = (ml - 1)/(m - 1)$ vertices
(E) $l$ leaves has $i = (l - 1)/(m - 1)$ internal vertices.

### Problem 6

Suppose $|A| = 8, |B| = 3$. Consider the number of possible functions $f: A \to B$

(A) The number of possible $f$ is $3^8$.
(B) If $f$ is one-to-one, the number is $6$.
(C) If $f$ is onto, the number is $8^3$.
(D) The number of possible $f^{-1}$ is $0$.
(E) If $f$ is bijection, the number is $0$.

### Problem 7

Consider a predicate $P(i,j)$, where $i, j$ are elements from the same domain $S$. Suppose all following statements are true:
$\forall i, p(i, i);\ \forall i, j, (i \neq j), p(i, j) \to \neg p(j, i);\ \forall i, j, k, (p(i, j) \land p(j, k)) \to p(i, k);$
$\forall i, j, p(i, j) \lor p(j, i);\ \exists! k, \forall i \neq k, p(k, i);$
($\exists!$ means "exist one and only one")
Which of the following options are correct?

(A) $p$ describes an equivalence relation. &emsp; (B) $p$ describes a partial order set.
(C) $p$ describes a total order relation. &emsp; (D) $p$ describes a lattice.
(E) $p$ describes a well order relation.

### Problem 8

Consider a general recursive mechanism $R$, whose input is an array $A()$ initially with $n$ elements. The pseudo code of $R$ is listed below, It takes a parameter $k$, use $\sqrt{n}$ ($n$ is the size of A when applied, $n$ may change) steps to partition A, and may call another function $Q$, whose complexity may vary and depends on the size of its input.

```
Procedure R (array A with size n, int k)
1. if n<k exit;                       . call R(Aₖ,k); // may change Aₖ;
2. partition A into k equal size parts  4. merge A₁, A₂, ..., Aₖ into new A with size n;
   A₁, A₂, ..., Aₖ (This takes √n steps)   (This takes k steps)
3. for (i=1 to k)                     5. call Q(A);
                                       6. return()
```

There are $3$ derived algorithms X, Y, Z, based on R. X sets $k$ as $2$, and its Q's complexity is $\theta(m)$, $m$ is the size of Q's input. Y sets $k$ as $4$, and its Q's complexity is $\theta(\sqrt{m})$, $m$ is input size. Z sets $k$ as $9$, and its Q's complexity is $\theta(m)$, $m$ is input size.
What following comparisons are true?

(A) X's complexity is better than Y and Z. &emsp; (B) Y's complexity is better than X and Z.
(C) X and Y's complexities are the same. &emsp; (D) X and Z's complexities are the same.
(E) X's complexity is $\theta(n \log n)$.

### Problem 9

Concerning the binomial coefficient $\binom{r}{k}$, what following formula are true?

(A) $\binom{r}{k} = \frac{r}{k} \binom{r-1}{k-1}$ *integer* $k \neq 0$; &emsp; (B) $\sum_{0}^{n} \binom{n}{k} (-1)^k = 0$, *integer* $n \geq 0$;
(C) $\sum_{0}^{n} \binom{k}{m} = \binom{n+1}{m+1}$, *integer* $m, n \geq 0$; &emsp; (D) $\sum_{0}^{n} \binom{r+k}{k} = \binom{r+n+1}{n}$, *integer* $n$;
(E) $\binom{r}{k} = \binom{r-1}{k-1} + \binom{r}{k-1}$, *integer* $k$;

### Problem 10

There is a series of number $a_n$, $\forall n > 1$, $(a_{n-1} - a_{n-2}) = 2(a_n - a_{n-1})$, $a_0 = 5$, $a_1 = 9$. Using generating function $f(z)$ to solve $a_n$, what of the followings are true?

(A) $f(z) = \left(\frac{10+3z}{2-3z+z^2}\right)$
(B) $f(z) = \left(\frac{1}{1-2z}\right) + \left(\frac{z}{(1-z)^2(1-2z)}\right)$.
(C) $f(z) = \left(\frac{-8}{1-(1/2)z}\right) - \left(\frac{13}{(1-z)}\right)$.
(D) $a_n = (13 - 8 \times (\frac{1}{2})^n)$
(E) $a_n = 16 \times 2^n - 13$.

**線性代數 --- 第 $11 \sim 12$, $16 \sim 20$ 題為多選題，ABCDE 每一選項 $1$ 分，答錯一個選項倒扣 $1$ 分，答錯倒扣到第 $11 \sim 12$, $16 \sim 20$ 題零分為止。（每題 $5$ 分）**

### Problem 11

Which of the following statements are true?

(A) If $A^2$ is a diagonal matrix, $A$ must be a diagonal matrix.
(B) If $A_{n \times n}$ has a complete set of orthonormal eigenvectors (*i.e.*, $n$ eigenvectors that are orthonormal), it must be a Hermitian matrix.
(C) If $AA^H = A^H A$, where $A^H$ is the Hermitian transpose of $A$, then $A$ can always be diagonalized.
(D) If the rank of an $n$ by $n$ matrix, $A$, is $r < n$, then its $n-r$ eigenvalues are zero.
(E) If $k$ is an eigenvalue of $A$, we may find more than one eigenvector corresponding to $k$.

### Problem 12

For the $197$ by $197$ finite difference matrix, $A$, which statements are true?

$$
A_{197 \times 197} = \begin{bmatrix} 2 & -1 & 0 & \cdot & \cdot & 0 \\ -1 & 2 & -1 & 0 & \cdot & \cdot \\ 0 & -1 & 2 & -1 & \cdot & \cdot \\ \cdot & 0 & -1 & \cdot & \cdot & \cdot \\ \cdot & \cdot & \cdot & \cdot & -1 & 0 \\ \cdot & \cdot & \cdot & \cdot & 2 & -1 \\ 0 & \cdot & \cdot & \cdot & -1 & 2 \end{bmatrix}
$$

(A) The determinant of $A$ is $D$. Then, $\text{mod}(|D|, 5) = 3$, where mod(.) is the modulo operation.
(B) $A$ can be expressed as $A = B + C$, where $B$ is a symmetric matrix and $C$ is a skew-symmetric matrix.
(C) $A$ can be expressed as $A = BCB^T$, where $B$ is an orthogonal matrix and $C$ is a diagonal matrix.
(D) $A$ can be expressed as $A = BCB^T$, where $B$ is a lower triangular matrix and $C$ is a diagonal matrix.
(E) $A$'s smallest eigenvalue is negative.

**第 $13 \sim 15$ 單選題，每題 $5$ 分答錯倒扣 $2$ 分，扣到所有單選題零分為止。**

### Problem 13

$A^5 = \begin{bmatrix} 32 & 100000 \\ 0 & 3125 \end{bmatrix}$. The determinant of $A$ is $M$. The closest integer of summing up the four entries in $A$ is $N$ = round($A_{11} + A_{12} + A_{21} + A_{22}$). What is the value of $\text{mod}(M + N \times 13, 5)$, where mod(.) is the modulo operation.

(A) $0$ &emsp; (B) $1$ &emsp; (C) $2$ &emsp; (D) $3$ &emsp; (E) $4$

### Problem 14

First, consider the linear system

$$
\begin{cases} kx + y + z = 1 \\ x + ky + z = 1 \\ x + y + kz = 1 \end{cases}
$$

If $k = a$, the system has more than one solution. If $k = b$, the system has no solution. The closest integer of $|a-b|$ is $c$. $M = \text{mod}(c, 5)$, where mod(.) is the modulo operation.
Next, consider the linear system

$$
\begin{cases} x + y + z = 4 \\ 2x + y + 2z = 7 \\ x \quad - 2z = 3 \\ \quad y + 2z = 4 \end{cases}
$$

Its least squares solution is $\{\bar{x}, \bar{y}, \bar{z}\}$. The closest integer of ($\bar{y} \times 50$) is N.
What is the value of $\text{mod}(M + N, 5)$?

(A) $0$ &emsp; (B) $1$ &emsp; (C) $2$ &emsp; (D) $3$ &emsp; (E) $4$

### Problem 15

The determinant of the following matrix $A$ is $M$.

$$
A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & -1 & 8 & 4 & 2 \\ 2 & 6 & 0 & -4 & 3 \\ 2 & 0 & 2 & 6 & 2 \\ 0 & 2 & 8 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 1 & 2 & 2 \end{bmatrix}
$$

The determinant of the following matrix $B$ is $N$.

$$
B = \begin{bmatrix} 1.25 & 1 & 1 & 1 \\ 1 & 1.2 & 1 & 1 \\ 1 & 1 & 1.1 & 1 \\ 1 & 1 & 1 & 1.5 \end{bmatrix}
$$

$K = \left|\frac{M}{N}\right| \times \frac{1}{10000}$. Which of the following is the range of $K$?

(A) $0 \leq K < 1$ &emsp; (B) $1 \leq K < 2$ &emsp; (C) $2 \leq K < 3$ &emsp; (D) $4 \leq K < 5$ &emsp; (E) $5 \leq K$

### Problem 16

$A$ and $B$ are two square matrices.

(A) If $A$ is similar to $B$, then $\det(A) = \det(B)$.
(B) If $A$ is similar to $B$, then $A$ and $B$ have the same eigenvectors.
(C) If $A$ is similar to $B$, then $A^2$ is similar to $B^2$.
(D) If $A$ is similar to $B$, then $AB$ is similar to $BA$.
(E) If $A^2$ is similar to $B^2$, then $A$ is similar to $B$.

### Problem 17

For a $n \times n$ real square matrix $A$. $\lambda_i$'s are eigenvalues of $A$.

(A) $\lambda_i$'s may be complex number.
(B) If some $\lambda_i = 0$, then $A$ is always not invertible.
(C) If some $\lambda_i$'s are the same, then $A$ is not diagonalizable.
(D) If $A = A^T$, then $\lambda_i$'s are positive real.
(E) If $A$ is diagonalizable, then $A$ has many different matrices $P$ and $D$ such that $A = PDP^{-1}$.

### Problem 18

If $A$ is a $m \times n$ matrix and $A$ can be $QR$ factorized. $W$ is the set of all columns of $A$, and $W^{\perp}$ is the orthogonal complement of $W$, then

(A) $W$ is a subspace.
(B) $W^{\perp}$ is a subspace.
(C) $(W^{\perp})^{\perp} = W$.
(D) $W \cap W^{\perp} = \phi$ (empty set)
(E) $m \geq n$.

### Problem 19

In the following terminologies which are **not** related to the least-squares problem.

(A) Inconsistent system.
(B) Eigenvector.
(C) Diagonalizable.
(D) Orthogonal projection.
(E) Gram - Schmidt process

### Problem 20

Construct a spectral decomposition of matrix $\begin{bmatrix} 3 & 4 \\ 4 & 9 \end{bmatrix}$. Which values are **not** in the solution matrices.

(A) $\frac{1}{5}, \frac{-1}{5}$. &emsp; (B) $\frac{2}{5}, \frac{-2}{5}$. &emsp; (C) $\frac{4}{5}, \frac{-4}{5}$. &emsp; (D) $\frac{1}{5}, \frac{4}{5}$. &emsp; (E) $\frac{-1}{5}, \frac{-4}{5}$.

## 112

**多選題每題 $5$ 分，共 $65$ 分，答錯每個選項倒扣 $1$ 分，扣至該大題（多選題）零分為止**

For question $1 \sim 4$, matrix $A = \begin{bmatrix} 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$ describes a binary relation **R**.

### Problem 1

About relation **R**, which of the following statements are true?

(A) **R** is reflexive. &emsp; (B) **R** is anti-symmetric. &emsp; (C) **R** is transitive.
(D) **R** is a partial ordering relation. &emsp; (E) The symmetric closure of **R** is transitive.

### Problem 2

Consider different closures of **R**. Which of the following statements are true?

(A) $4$ more '1's must be added to $A$ to make **R**'s reflexive closure.
(B) $6$ more '1's must be added to $A$ to make **R**'s symmetric closure.
(C) $3$ more '1's must be added to $A$ to make **R**'s transitive closure.
(D) The reflexive closure is a partial ordering set.
(E) The symmetric closure of **R** is an equivalence relation.

### Problem 3

If **G** is a graph representation of **R**, which of the following statements are true?

(A) **G** is weakly connected.
(B) the longest simple path of **G** is length $4$.
(C) The reflexive, symmetric, and transitive closure of **R** has $2$ connected components.
(D) There is a Hamilton path in the transitive closure of **R**.
(E) $\mathbf{R}^{-1}$ is strongly connected.

### Problem 4

Let **S** be the symmetric and reflexive closure of **R** and each element is a proposition. If **S** reflects Boolean operators' behavior, what are possible operators?

(A) $\land$ &emsp; (B) $\lor$ &emsp; (C) $\neg$ &emsp; (D) $\to$ &emsp; (E) $\leftrightarrow$

### Problem 5

Which are sufficient but not necessary conditions for the corresponding goals?

(A) "Graph $G_1$ and $G_2$ are isomorphic" for "$G_1$ and $G_2$ both have Euler circuits."
(B) growth order function $f$ and $g$, "$g$ is $O(f)$ but not $\theta(f)$" for "$g$ is $o(f)$".
(C) "Existing an equivalence relation **R** on set **S**" for "**S** has a partition based on **R**".
(D) An infinite set of predicates **P**, "Existing a well order on **P**" for "using mathematic induction to prove all predicates in **P**".
(E) "**P** is false" for "$\mathbf{P} \to \mathbf{Q}$ is true."

### Problem 6

Consider a set S of $n$ nodes interconnecting to form a graph **G**. If two nodes "directly connect" to each other, there is an undirected edge between them. Let $D(a)$ denote the degree of a node $a$. Which of the following are correct statements?

(A) If **G** is connected, there must be a simple path of length $n$.
(B) $\sum_{i \in S} D(i)$ is even. &emsp; (C) If **G** is connected, $\sum_{i \in S} D(i) \geq 2n$.
(D) "$\exists a, b, (a \neq b) \land (D(a) = D(b))$" is true.
(E) If **G** is connected, the transitive and reflexive closure of "direct connecting" relation can form a complete graph.

### Problem 7

To analyze the complexity of the following procedure P, We will use the following assumptions: Suppose P and B are both procedures. B take $\theta(\sqrt{m})$ time to compute, where $m$ is the size of B's input; each statement line in and outside the loop counts $1$ step.

```
Procedure P(array1[a₁, a₂, ..., aₙ])
1. if n<9 exit.
2. call B(array1[a₁, a₂, ..., aₙ])
   declare new empty array2, array3, array4;
3. for (i=1 to n)
4.  { if ((i mod 9)=0)  insert aᵢ into array2;
5.    if ((i mod 9)=3)  insert aᵢ into array3;
6.    if ((i mod 9)=6)  insert aᵢ into array4 }
8. call P( array2 );
9. call P( array3 );
10. call P (array4);
```

Which of the following relations on $F_n$ can describe the complexity of procedure P with respect to problem size $n$?

(A) $F_n = 3F_{n/3} + \theta(\sqrt{n})$ &emsp; (B) $F_n = 3F_{n/3} + F_n + \theta(n)$ &emsp; (C) $F_n = 9F_{n/9} + \theta(\sqrt{n})$
(D) $F_n = 3F_{n/9} + \theta(n)$ &emsp; (E) $F_n = 3F_{n/9} + \theta(n^{1/2})$

### Problem 8

What can be the time complexity level of the procedure P in question 7?

(A) $O(n^{\sqrt{2}})$ &emsp; (B) $O(n \log n)$ &emsp; (C) $O(n^{\log n})$ &emsp; (D) $O(n^{1/2})$ &emsp; (E) $O(\sqrt{n} \log n)$

### Problem 9

An alphabet set $\{\alpha_1, \alpha_2, ..., \alpha_8\}$ is used to form a string. A legal string cannot have consecutive $\{\alpha_1 \alpha_1, \alpha_1 \alpha_2, \alpha_2 \alpha_1, \alpha_2 \alpha_2\}$ in any part of the string. Suppose $P_{n-1}$ is the number of valid string of length $n$. Which of the following are true?

(A) $P_n = 2P_{n-1} + 6^n, n \geq 2$ &emsp; (B) $P_n = 6P_{n-1} + 12P_{n-2}, n \geq 2$
(C) $P_n = 8P_{n-1} - 4, n \geq 2$ &emsp; (D) $P_0 = 8, P_1 = 48$ &emsp; (E) $P_0 = 8, P_1 = 64$

### Problem 10

When using the generating function $g(z)$ to solve $P_n$ in the previous question, which of the following are true?

(A) $g(z)(1 - 6z - 12z^2) = 60z + 8$ &emsp; (B) $g(z)(1 - 6z + 12z^2) = 12z + 8$

(C) $g(z) = \dfrac{4 + 2\sqrt{21}}{1 - (3 + \sqrt{21})z} + \dfrac{4 - 2\sqrt{21}}{1 - (3 - \sqrt{21})z}$

(D) $g(z) = \dfrac{4 + (18/\sqrt{21})}{1 - (3 + \sqrt{21})z} + \dfrac{4 - (18/\sqrt{21})}{1 - (3 - \sqrt{21})z}$

(E) $P_n = ((4 + 18/\sqrt{21}) \times (3 + \sqrt{21})^n) + ((4 - 18/\sqrt{21}) \times (3 - \sqrt{21})^n)$

### Problem 11

Which of the following statements about symmetric matrices are true?

(A) The symmetric matrix $A$ has a complete set of orthonormal eigenvectors even though it has repeated eigenvalues.
(B) For the symmetric matrices $A$ and $B$, $A + B$ and $AB$ are both symmetric.
(C) If the rank of a symmetric matrix, $A_{n \times n}$, is $r < n$, then its $n-r$ eigenvalues are zero.
(D) The eigenvalues of symmetric matrices are real values. In other words, they cannot be complex values.
(E) None of the above is true.

### Problem 12

Which of the following statements about the matrix $A_{m \times n}$, $m < n$ are true?

(A) The sum of its nullity and its rank is $m$.
(B) If its rank is equal to $m$, then $AA^T$ must be invertible.
(C) The number of independent columns and the number of independent rows in the matrix $A$ can be different.
(D) After applying Gaussian elimination on $A$, the number of zero rows must be $m - r$, where $r$ is the rank of $A$.
(E) None of the above is true.

### Problem 13

Which of the following about eigenvalues/eigenvectors are true?

(A) If an $8 \times 8$ square matrix has $8$ positive pivots after applying Gaussian elimination, then its eigenvalues cannot be negative.
(B) For the two square matrices $A$ and $B$, both of which are diagonalizable, if $AB = BA$, then $A$ and $B$ have the same eigenvalues.
(C) If two square matrices $A$ and $B$ are similar, i.e., $A = MBM^{-1}$, then $A$ and $B$ have the same eigenvalues.
(D) For a square matrix $A$, the matrices $AA^T$ and $A^T A$ have the same eigenvalues.
(E) None of the above is true.

**單選題每題 $5$ 分，共 $35$ 分，答錯一題倒扣 $2$ 分，扣至該大題（單選題）零分為止**

### Problem 14

Given a $4$ by $4$ matrix, $A$, as below, find its inverse matrix, $A^{-1}$.

$$
A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 & 1 & -1 \\ 2 & 5 & 1 & -1 \\ 1 & 3 & 2 & 1 \\ 2 & 4 & 1 & -2 \end{bmatrix}
$$

The sum of all the elements of $A^{-1}$ is $b$. Rounding $|b|$ to the nearest integer, $c$. What is the value of $\text{mod}(c, 5)$, where mod(.) is the modulo operation. (For example, $\text{mod}(5,2) = 1$.)

(A) $0$ &emsp; (B) $1$ &emsp; (C) $2$ &emsp; (D) $3$ &emsp; (E) $4$

### Problem 15

For the following Matlab code:

```
a=11;                    %Set 'a' as the number of rows/cols. in a square matrix A
A=ones(a,a);             %Set A as an 11x11 all-one matrix (All the elements are 1)
for m=1:a
    A(m,m)=0.9;         %Set all the elements on the main diagonal of A as 0.9
end
d=det(A);               %Calculate the determinant of A
c=abs(d*(10^a)+7);       %Adjust the value, and abs(.) is the absolute-value func.
answer=mod(c,5);         %mod(.) is the modulo operation
```

What is the value of "answer"?

(A) $0$ &emsp; (B) $1$ &emsp; (C) $2$ &emsp; (D) $3$ &emsp; (E) $4$

### Problem 16

The following matrix $A$ is the transformation matrix of a linear operator A. Find the linear transformation matrix $B$ that represents the linear operator A relative to the basis $[1, 1, 0]^T$, $[0, 1, 1]^T$ and $[1, 2, 2]^T$.

$$
A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 3 & 1 \\ 2 & 5 & -4 \\ 1 & -2 & 2 \end{bmatrix}
$$

'$b$' is obtained by summing up all the elements in $B$, taking the absolute value and then rounding to the nearest integer. What is the value of $\text{mod}(b, 5)$, where mod(.) is the modulo operator?

(A) $0$ &emsp; (B) $1$ &emsp; (C) $2$ &emsp; (D) $3$ &emsp; (E) $4$

### Problem 17

Consider the subspace S of $\mathbb{R}^4$ spanned by the vectors: $\mathbf{v}_1 = [1, 1, 1, 1]^T$, $\mathbf{v}_2 = [1, 1, 2, 4]^T$, $\mathbf{v}_3 = [1, 2, -4, -3]^T$. Apply the Gram-Schmidt method starting from $\mathbf{v}_1$, then $\mathbf{v}_2$ and finally $\mathbf{v}_3$ to obtain the orthogonal basis of S: $\mathbf{u}_1 = [1, 1, 1, 1]^T$, $\mathbf{u}_2 = [-1, a, b, c]^T$, $\mathbf{u}_3 = [1, d, e, f]^T$, where $a, b, c, d, e$ and $f$ are all integers (rounded to the nearest ones if necessary). What is $\text{mod}(|a+b+c+d+e+f|, 5)$, where mod(.) is the modulo operator?

(A) $0$ &emsp; (B) $1$ &emsp; (C) $2$ &emsp; (D) $3$ &emsp; (E) $4$

### Problem 18

Given that $A = \begin{bmatrix} 0 & 0 & -2 \\ 1 & 2 & 1 \\ 1 & 0 & 3 \end{bmatrix}$, $B = A^{12}$. '$b$' is obtained by summing up all the elements in $B$. What is $\text{mod}(|b|, 5)$, where mod(.) is the modulo operator?

(A) $0$ &emsp; (B) $1$ &emsp; (C) $2$ &emsp; (D) $3$ &emsp; (E) $4$

### Problem 19

Find the least squares solution of the system $Ax = b$, in which

$$
A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & 1 \\ 1 & 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 & 1 \\ 1 & 1 & 0 \end{bmatrix} \text{ and } b = [4, -1, 0, 1]^T.
$$

$c$ is the rounding (or nearest) integer of the sum of the elements in $x$. What is the value of $\text{mod}(|c|, 5)$, where mod(.) is the modulo operator?

(A) $0$ &emsp; (B) $1$ &emsp; (C) $2$ &emsp; (D) $3$ &emsp; (E) $4$

### Problem 20

Find an orthogonal matrix $P$ that diagonalizes $A$ as shown below. That is,

$P^T A P = D$, where $D$ is a diagonal matrix.

$$
A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & -1 & 2 \\ -1 & 1 & 2 \\ 2 & 2 & 2 \end{bmatrix}
$$

The product of the three elements in the first row of $P$ is $b$. The product of the three elements in the main diagonal of $D$ is $d$. $c$ is the rounding (or nearest) integer of $|b \times d \times 6|$. What is the value of $\text{mod}(c, 5)$, where mod(.) is the modulo operator?

(A) $0$ &emsp; (B) $1$ &emsp; (C) $2$ &emsp; (D) $3$ &emsp; (E) $4$

## 113

**第一部分: 共 $50$ 分，單選題，每題五分，錯一題倒扣 $2$ 分，扣到單選題【整大題】$0$ 分為止**

### Problem 1

Let $A = \begin{bmatrix} 2 & 4 & 2 \\ 1 & 5 & 2 \\ 4 & -1 & 9 \end{bmatrix}$, and the $LU$ decomposition of $A$ be

$\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 \\ a & 1 & 0 \\ b & c & 1 \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} d & e & f \\ 0 & g & h \\ 0 & 0 & i \end{bmatrix}$. What is $\lfloor a + b + c + d + e + f + g + h + i \rfloor \% 5$?

(% is the modulo operation. $\lfloor z \rfloor$ rounds $z$ to the smaller nearest integer.)

(a) $0$
(b) $1$
(c) $2$
(d) $3$
(e) $4$

### Problem 2

Suppose that in $P_3$ we want to change from the ordered basis $[1, x, x^2]$ to the ordered basis $[1, 2x, 4x^2 - 2]$. Let the transition matrix from the first basis to the second basis be $S$, and the number of zeros in $S$ be $D$. What is $D \% 5$?

(% is the modulo operation.)

(a) $0$
(b) $1$
(c) $2$
(d) $3$
(e) $4$

### Problem 3

Let $A$ be a $4 \times 4$ matrix with reduced row echelon form given by $U = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & -1 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 & 3 & 2 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \end{bmatrix}$. Let the first two columns of $A$ be $\begin{bmatrix} 3 \\ 2 \\ -1 \\ 2 \end{bmatrix}$ and $\begin{bmatrix} 1 \\ 1 \\ -2 \\ 3 \end{bmatrix}$, and denote the third column of $A$ as $\begin{bmatrix} a \\ b \\ c \\ d \end{bmatrix}$. What is $\lfloor a + b + c + d \rfloor \% 5$?

(% is the modulo operation. $\lfloor z \rfloor$ rounds $z$ to the smaller nearest integer.)

(a) $0$
(b) $1$
(c) $2$
(d) $3$
(e) $4$

### Problem 4

Let the matrix $A = (a_{ij})$ represent the composite transformations "a yaw of $45°$, followed by a pitch of $-90°$ and then a roll of $-45°$". What is $Round\{|\sum a_{ij}|\} \% 5$?

(% is the modulo operation. $Round\{z\}$ rounds $z$ to the nearest integer.)

(a) $0$
(b) $1$
(c) $2$
(d) $3$
(e) $4$

### Problem 5

Let $A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 \\ 0 & 1 & 2 & 3 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 2 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$. What is the dimension spanned by the eigenvectors of $A$?

(a) $0$
(b) $1$
(c) $2$
(d) $3$
(e) $4$

### Problem 6

$A = \begin{bmatrix} 5 & 2 & 2 \\ 3 & 6 & 3 \\ 6 & 6 & 9 \end{bmatrix}$, $B = A^3 - 20A^2 + 92A - 120I_{3 \times 3}$. $D$ is the determinant of $B$. What is $|D| \% 5$? (% is the modulo operation. $|.|$ is the absolute value.)

(a) $0$
(b) $1$
(c) $2$
(d) $3$
(e) $4$

### Problem 7

The subspace $U$ of $\mathbb{R}^4$ is spanned by the three vectors:
$\mathbf{v}_1 = [1, -1, -1, 1]^T$, $\mathbf{v}_2 = [1, 2, -3, 2]^T$, $\mathbf{v}_3 = [3, 3, 0, -2]^T$.
Use the Gram-Schmidt process to find the orthonormal basis of $U$:

$\mathbf{t}_1 = [\frac{1}{2}, -\frac{1}{2}, -\frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{2}]^T$, $\mathbf{t}_2 = [m, n, p, q]^T$, $\mathbf{t}_3 = [r, s, x, y]^T$. $D = \left(\text{Round}\left\{\frac{1}{n^2 s^2}\right\}\right) \% 5$. What is $D$?

(% is the modulo operation. $Round\{z\}$ rounds $z$ to the nearest integer.)

(a) $0$
(b) $1$
(c) $2$
(d) $3$
(e) $4$

### Problem 8

Following the previous question. The subspace $V = U^{\perp}$ is $U$'s orthogonal complement in $\mathbb{R}^4$. Given a vector $w = [10, 0, 8, 2]^T$, find $w = v + u$, where $v = [a, b, c, d]^T \in V$, $u = [e, f, g, h]^T \in U$. What is $(\text{Round}\{c^2 + g^2\}) \% 5$?

(% is the modulo operation. $Round\{z\}$ rounds $z$ to the nearest integer.)

(a) $0$
(b) $1$
(c) $2$
(d) $3$
(e) $4$

### Problem 9

$A = \begin{bmatrix} 4 & 1 & -1 \\ 2 & 5 & -2 \\ 1 & 1 & 2 \end{bmatrix}$. $P$ is used to diagonalize $A$ by $P^{-1}AP = D$, where

$D = \begin{bmatrix} a & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & b & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & c \end{bmatrix}$, $a \leq b \leq c$, and $P = \begin{bmatrix} d & e & 1 \\ -1 & f & g \\ h & 1 & j \end{bmatrix}$. What is the value $K$,

$K = (\text{Round}\{|a + b + c + d + e + f + g + h + j|\}) \% 5$?

($|.|$ is the absolute value. $\%$ is the modulo operation. $Round\{z\}$ rounds $z$ to the nearest integer.)

(a) $0$
(b) $1$
(c) $2$
(d) $3$
(e) $4$

### Problem 10

We are required to find the parabola $C + Dt + Et^2$ that comes closest to the values $v = (0, 2, 2, 5)$ at the times $t = (0, 1, 3, 4)$. What is $F = \text{Round}\{|C + D + E| \times 256\} \% 5$? ($|.|$ is the absolute value. $\%$ is the modulo operation. $Round\{z\}$ rounds $z$ to the nearest integer.)

(a) $0$
(b) $1$
(c) $2$
(d) $3$
(e) $4$

**第二部分: 共 $50$ 分，多選題，每題 $5$ 分，每個選項單獨計分，每個選項 $1$ 分，答錯一個選項倒扣 $1$ 分，扣到多選題【整大題】$0$ 分為止。**

### Problem 11

Which of these nonplanar graphs have the property that the removal of any vertex and all edges incident with that vertex produces a planar graph?

(a) $K_5$
(b) $K_6$
(c) $K_{3,3}$
(d) $K_{3,4}$
(e) $K_{4,4}$

### Problem 12

Draw a graph with $64$ vertices representing the squares of a chessboard. Connect two vertices with an edge if you can move legally between the corresponding squares with a single move of a knight. [The moves of a knight are L-shaped, two squares vertically (or horizontally) followed by one square horizontally (respectively, vertically).]

(a) This graph is bipartite.
(b) The largest degree number of the graph is $10$.
(c) The smallest degree number of the graph is $4$.
(d) There are four vertices of degree $2$.
(e) There are eight vertices of degree $3$.

### Problem 13

A sequence $d_1, d_2, ..., d_n$ is called graphic if it is the degree sequence of a simple graph. Which of these sequences are graphic?

(a) $5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0$
(b) $6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1$
(c) $2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2$
(d) $3, 3, 3, 2, 2, 2$
(e) $3, 3, 2, 2, 2, 2$

### Problem 14

Find the cut vertices and cut edges in the following graph.

=== 圖片描述：一個無向圖，包含 $8$ 個節點：$a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h$。節點位置與邊如下：$a$ 在左上，$b$ 在左下，$c$ 在中下，$d$ 在中上（略偏右上）。$e$ 在右側中間偏上，$f$ 在右上，$g$ 在右邊，$h$ 在右下。邊連接：$a$-$b$（左側垂直邊），$a$-$d$（從左上到中上的斜邊），$b$-$c$（底部橫邊），$c$-$d$（從中下到中上），$c$-$e$（從中下到右中），$e$-$f$（右側斜向上），$e$-$h$（右側斜向下），$f$-$g$（右上到右邊的橫邊），$g$-$h$（右邊垂直邊）。整體結構：左側形成一個四邊形 $a$-$b$-$c$-$d$，右側形成一個四邊形 $e$-$f$-$g$-$h$，兩部分通過邊 $c$-$e$ 連接。 ===

(a) The cut vertices are $b, c, d$ and $e$.
(b) The cut vertices are $b, c$, and $e$.
(c) The only cut edge is $\{c, e\}$.
(d) The cut edges are $\{a, b\}$ and $\{c, e\}$.
(e) The cut edges are $\{b, d\}$ and $\{c, e\}$.

### Problem 15

Let $G$ be a graph with at least three vertices.

(a) If there is a Hamiltonian path between any two vertices of $G$, $G$ must contain a Hamiltonian cycle.
(b) If, at every vertex $v$ in G, there is a Hamiltonian path which starts at $v$, $G$ must contain a Hamiltonian cycle.
(c) If there is an Eulerian trail (path) between any two vertices of $G$, $G$ must contain an Eulerian circuit.
(d) $K_{m,n}$ is Hamiltonian (a graph with a Hamiltonian cycle) if and only if $n > 1$ and $m = n$.
(e) $K_{m,n}$ is Eulerian (a graph with a Eulerian circuit) if and only if $m$ and $n$ are both odd.

### Problem 16

Let "P$\to$Q is true" be a relation R(P,Q) between proposition P and Q, where "$\to$" is the **implication** logic connective. Which of the followings are true?

(a) R is reflexive.
(b) R is anti-symmetric
(c) R is transitive
(d) R is a partial ordering relation.
(e) The transitive closure of R is R itself

### Problem 17

Suppose a set S, $|S| = 3$. Consider possible function $f: S \times S \to S$. Which of the following statements are true?

(a) number of possible $f$ is $3^6$
(b) number of possible $f$ is $3^9$
(c) number of 1-to-1 $f$ is $3!$
(d) number of onto $f$ is $3^9 - (3 \bullet 2^9) + 3$
(e) number of bijection $f$ is $1$.

### Problem 18

Consider Josephus Problem, where $n$ people are placed clockwise around a circle, from $1, 2, ...,$ to $n$, $n$ is next to $1$; every second person is eliminated each step (so the first few eliminated are $2, 4, 6, ...$), until the last one, say $k$, is remained, we denote $J(n) = k$. $\forall n > 1, n \in N$, Which of the followings are true?

(a) $J(n+1) = \frac{1}{2} J(n) + 1$

(b) $J(2n) = 2J(n) - 1$
(c) $J(2n+1) = 2J(n) - 1$
(d) $J(2n) = 2J(n) + 1$
(e) $J(2n+1) = 2J(n) + 1$

### Problem 19

Which of the following statements are true?

(a) To find greatest common divisor for $2$ large integers, Euclidean algorithm provides best complexity if the $2$ numbers have been prime factorized.
(b) In a weighted graph, finding a minimum-weight Hamilton path is un-computable.
(c) Lattice is a special case of partial ordering set.
(d) Bipartite graph can be used to represent any function.
(e) We can use unlimited number of "and", "or", and "not" connectives to describe the logic behavior of any logic operator.

### Problem 20

Solving recurrence equation $\forall n \geq 2, 2a_n = 7a_{n-1} - 6a_{n-2}, a_0 = 3/2, a_1 = 11/4$. Which of the following statement are true?

(a) The characteristic polynomial for this equation is $6x^2 - 7x + 2 = 0$.
(b) using generating function, we have $2G(z) - 7zG(z) + 6z^2 G(z) = 0$.
(c) using generating function, we have $G(z) = \dfrac{3 - 5z}{2 - 7z + 6z^2}$
(d) $a_n = ((1/2) \bullet (3/2)^n) + 2^n$
(e) $a_n = (1/2)^{n+1} + 2^n$
