## 108

Note: NO partial score will be given for partially correct answer for subproblems in each problem (or for a single problem without subproblems). Unless otherwise noted, only the final solution is needed.

### Problem 1

(10%) Let $b_n$ be the number of different permutations obtainable by passing the numbers $1, 2, 3, \ldots, n$ through a stack and deleting in all possible ways. (a) Give the recursive formula for $b_n$. (b) Give the analytic formula for $b_n$.

### Problem 2

(5%) Convert the expression `"(a/(c*(b+d)))/(e-a)*c"` into a postfix form.

### Problem 3

(10%) Draw the final min-heap tree after the following operations: insert 7, insert 4, insert 3, insert 1, delete min, insert 9, insert 2, insert 5, delete min, delete min.

### Problem 4

(8%) Describe how you can construct a heap of $n$ keys with $O(n)$ complexity. You can simply use $n = 15$ as an example to explain your idea. (You don't need to prove the complexity.)

### Problem 5

(20%) Quicksort is a fast and commonly used comparison-based sorting algorithm. Below you can find a version of quicksort algorithm in pseudo code format.

```
QUICKSORT(A, p, r)
1  if p < r
2      q = PARTITION(A, p, r)
3      QUICKSORT(A, p, q - 1)
4      QUICKSORT(A, q + 1, r)

PARTITION(A, p, r)
1  x = A[r]
2  i = p - 1
3  for j = p to r - 1
4      if A[j] <= x
5          i = i + 1
6          exchange A[i] with A[j]
7  exchange A[i + 1] with A[r]
8  return i + 1
```

(a) (6%) True or false:
- (1) The output of `QUICKSORT()` above is a **non-increasing** sorted sequence. (2%)
- (2) The `QUICKSORT()` above is a **stable** sorting algorithm. (2%)
- (3) The `QUICKSORT()` above is an **in-place** sorting algorithm. (2%)

(b) (4%) The given version of `QUICKSORT` above cannot efficiently process the cases where in the input array there are a large number of repeated elements. Analyze the worst-case running time which occurs when all $n$ keys in the input array $A$ are identical. Please give it in big-O notation in terms of $n$.

(c) (10%) To address the previously mentioned problematic case, we will now develop a new partition algorithm `PARITITIONTHREE()` that separates the input keys into three groups, the ones that are smaller than, that are identical to, and that are larger than the pivot key $x$. The return values `q1` and `q2` represent the indices of the first and the last keys of the group that equals the pivot key, respectively. Fill the blanks (A), (B), (C) in `PARITIONTHREE()` below to complete the implementation, such that `QUICKSORTTHREE()` runs in $O(n)$-time when the input array has all $n$ elements identical.

```
QUICKSORTTHREE(A, p, r)
1  if p < r
2      (q1, q2) = PARTITIONTHREE(A, p, r)
3      QUICKSORTTHREE(A, p, q1 - 1)
4      QUICKSORTTHREE(A, q2 + 1, r)

PARTITIONTHREE(A, p, r)
1   x = A[r]
2   q1 = p
3   q2 = r
4   j = p
5   while j <= q2
6       if A[j] < x
7           exchange A[j] with A[q1]
8           // (A)
9           j = j + 1
10      elseif A[j] > x
11          exchange A[j] with A[q2]
12          // (B)
13      else
14          // (C)
15  return (q1, q2)
```

### Problem 6

(13%) When implementing a hash table, one of the commonly used collision resolution methods is open addressing. Let $k$ be the key, and $m$ be the size of the hash table. Assume each table entry can hold one key.

(a) (3%) The simplest open addressing method is called **linear probing**, where if a slot is already occupied, the following slots are "probed" sequentially. Assume an auxiliary hash function $h'(k) = k \bmod m$. Please give the hash function $h(k, i)$ of linear probing with the given auxiliary function, where $i$ is the number of times the hash table has been probed with this key (and thus starting from 0).

(b) (5%) Linear probing is easy to implement but suffers from the problem of primary clustering. A more complex open addressing method which can mitigate this problem is **double hashing**, using a hash function in the form of $h(k, i) = (h_1(k) + i h_2(k)) \bmod m$, with two auxiliary hash functions $h_1(k)$ and $h_2(k)$. $i$ is the number of times the hash table has been probed with key $k$. Assume two auxiliary hash functions $h_1(k) = k \bmod 16$, $h_2(k) = 1 + (k \bmod 15)$, and $m = 16$. Show the final hash table content after inserting all of the following keys to an initially empty hash table in the given order: $\{16, 3, 35, 67, 51, 1, 15, 31, 19, 17\}$.

(c) (5%) Prof. Alpha proposes a different double hashing method, using two auxiliary hash functions $h_1(k) = k \bmod 16$, $h_2(k) = 2(k \bmod 8)$, respectively. Assume the table size $m = 16$. Use an example to briefly explain how Prof. Alpha's method is problematic.

### Problem 7

(6%) True or false:

(a) (2%) The Dijkstra's algorithm (single run) solves the single-source shortest path problem with positive, zero, or negative edge weights, if there is no negative cycle.

(b) (2%) The Bellman-Ford algorithm (single run) solves the all-pairs shortest path problem with non-negative edge weights.

(c) (2%) The Floyd-Warshall algorithm (single run) solves the all-pairs shortest path with positive, zero, or negative edge weights, even if there are negative cycles.

### Problem 8

(8%) Given a directed graph $G$ where vertex $u$ (in $G$) has at least one path to any other vertex (in $G$), the following pseudocode is designed to output an acyclic graph. However, in Lines 8, 10, 11, and 14, each of A, B, C, and D should be 0, 1, or 2. Write down the correct values of A, B, C, and D so that the pseudocode can successfully output an acyclic graph.

```
1   Cycle-Removal(G, u)
2     Initialize S as a stack
3     Label all vertices in G as Type-0
4     Label u as Type-1
5     S.push(u)
6     while S is not empty
7       v = the top vertex of S // Comment: not S.pop() here
8       if v has a Type-A neighbor w in G
9         Remove (v, w) from G
10      else if v a Type-B neighbor w in G
11        Label w as Type-C
12        S.push(w)
13      else
14        Label v as Type-D
15        S.pop()
16      end if
17    end while
18    output G
```

### Problem 9

(10%) At 9am, 14 ships are leaving for the other side as shown below, where the English alphabets mean the types of those ships. For safety reasons, each ship can only stop at a pier having the same alphabet, and, if the routes of two ships cross each other, one ship needs to wait 15 minutes before leaving.

=== 圖片描述：一張碼頭與船隻的示意圖。上排為對岸的碼頭（pier），由左到右共 14 個方格，各標示字母：D, F, A, D, B, D, C, E, B, E, A, G, C, F。中間標示為河流（river）。下排為船隻（ship），由左到右共 14 艘，各標示字母：E, F, B, E, G, E, C, A, E, B, D, A, B, D；船隻下方標示 index number（由左到右）為 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14。每艘船只能停靠字母相同的碼頭。 ===

(a) (4%) Write down the maximum number of ships which can leave at 9am.

(b) (6%) Following (a), write down the index numbers (between 1 and 14) of the ships which can leave at 9am.

### Problem 10

(10%) The goal of this problem is to transform the following sequence of shapes into another sequence of shapes so that the total cost is minimized.

=== 圖片描述：待轉換的形狀序列，由左到右依序為：方形、圓形、三角形、方形、三角形、方形、三角形、方形、圓形、三角形（square, circle, triangle, square, triangle, square, triangle, square, circle, triangle）。 ===

The rules of transformation are shown below. For example, if you do not replace anything, the total cost is $6 + 3 + 2 + 6 + 2 + 6 + 2 + 6 + 3 + 2 = 38$. If you replace the last two shapes (circle and triangle) by the rule #3, the total cost is $6 + 3 + 2 + 6 + 2 + 6 + 2 + 6 + 4 = 37$. Note that you can choose not to replace a shape if the total cost can be minimized. Also, a rule of transformation can be applied more than once.

=== 圖片描述：形狀成本與轉換規則表。

形狀成本（shape cost）：方形（square）= 6；圓形（circle）= 3；三角形（triangle）= 2。

轉換規則（rule of transformation），每列為「轉換前形狀序列（cost before transformation）→（規則編號）轉換後形狀（cost after transformation）」：
- 成本 9 (6+3)：方形、圓形 →(#1) 一個合併形狀（左方右圓的膠囊狀），成本 7。
- 成本 8 (6+2)：方形、三角形 →(#2) 一個合併形狀（左方右尖），成本 7。
- 成本 5 (3+2)：圓形、三角形 →(#3) 一個合併形狀（水滴狀），成本 4。
- 成本 8 (2+6)：三角形、方形 →(#4) 一個菱形，成本 6。
- 成本 11 (6+3+2)：方形、圓形、三角形 →(#5) 一個合併形狀，成本 8。
- 成本 14 (6+2+6)：方形、三角形、方形 →(#6) 一個合併形狀（中間內凹的蝴蝶結狀），成本 12。
- 成本 10 (2+6+2)：三角形、方形、三角形 →(#7) 一個六邊形（左右尖的長六邊形），成本 7。
===

(a) (4%) Write down the minimum total cost after transforming the given sequence.

(b) (6%) Following (a), write down the applied rules of transformation from left of the sequence to right of the sequence.

## 109

Please select *all* the correct answer(s) to question 1 to 10. Note that there could be 0 to 5 correct answers. If none of the answer is correct, answer "none". If you do not wish to answer a question, leave it blank. All 10 answers must be written on the first page of your answer book, and the answer to question 1 must be in the first line, the answer to question 2 must be in the second line, and so on. If you fail to follow these rules then your answers will be *ignored*.

### Problem 1

(3 points) Let $f(n)$ be the number of additions in the following algorithm.

```
for i = 1 to n do
    for j = 1 to i do
        for k = 1 to j do
            C[i][j][k] = A[i][j][k] + B[i][j][k];
        end for
    end for
end for
```

1. $f(n) = O(n^2 \sqrt{n})$
2. $f(n) = O(n^2 \log n)$
3. $f(n) = O(n^3)$
4. $f(n) = O(n^3 \log n)$
5. $f(n) = O(n^{100})$

### Problem 2

(3 points) Given two sorted list $A$ and $B$ (in increasing key order), the following recursive algorithm merges $A$ and $B$ into a sorted list $C$ (also in increasing key order).

- If either $A$ or $B$ is *empty* then the result is the other list.
- If both $A$ or $B$ are *not* empty, we compare the keys of the first nodes of $A$ and $B$, and select the *smaller* one (denoted as $s$), and remove it from the list. Then we *recursively* merge the remaining parts of $A$ and $B$ into a new sorted list $C'$, then we concatenate $s$ with $C'$ into the final sorted list $C$.

Let $f(n, m)$ be the *minimum* number of comparisons of this algorithm, where $n$ and $m$ are the numbers of nodes in $A$ and $B$ respectively. $f(n, m)$ is?

1. $\Omega(n)$
2. $\Omega(m)$
3. $\Omega(n + m)$
4. $\Omega(mn)$
5. $\Omega(mn(\log m + \log n))$

### Problem 3

(3 points) We now use the merge algorithm in the previous question to sort a set of keys. We first make each key a list of a single node. Then we merge the first and the second lists into a sorted list of length two, the third and the fourth lists into a sorted list of length two, and so on. If we start with $n$ keys now we have roughly $n/2$ sorted list of length two now. We then merge these lists of length two into roughly $n/4$ sorted list of length four, and so on. Finally we will have a sorted list of length $n$. Let $f(n)$ denote the *maximum possible* total number of comparisons of this algorithm, then $f(n)$ is? Note that all the answers are in little-o notation.

1. $o(n)$
2. $o(n\sqrt{n})$
3. $o(n \log n)$
4. $o(n(\log n)^2)$
5. $o(n^2)$

### Problem 4

(3 points) A *binary minimum heap* is a binary tree in which every level is completely full, except the last level, which is filled from the left to right. Here the *level* of a node is its distance to the root, so the root has level 0 and the children of the root will have level 1, and so on. Also the key of a parent is less than those of its children. For ease of discussion we assume that all keys in the heap are *distinct*. Now which of the following descriptions about a binary minimum heap of *10* nodes (see the figure below) are correct?

=== 圖片描述：一棵有 10 個節點的二元最小堆積（binary minimum heap）樹狀圖，節點以空心圓表示，未標數值。結構為：根節點（level 0）有左右兩個子節點（level 1）。左子節點有兩個子節點（level 2），右子節點也有兩個子節點（level 2）。最左側 level 2 的節點再有兩個子節點（level 3，即最底層由左填入的兩個葉節點）。整體為一棵完整填滿至倒數第二層、最後一層由左至右填入的完全二元樹，共 10 個節點。 ===

1. The second smallest key is always in level 1.
2. The largest key is always in a leaf, i.e., a node without any children.
3. The second largest key is always in a leaf.
4. Let $n$ be the number of nodes and we consider the case of arbitrary $n$, then the height of the tree is $\Theta(\log n)$.
5. Let $n$ be the number of nodes and we consider the case of arbitrary $n$, then we can find the *third* smallest key of the heap by $O(1)$ key comparisons.

### Problem 5

(3 points) We will follow the notations from the previous question. We can build a heap from an array of $n$ keys by the following algorithm. A *heapify* operation for a binary minimum heap combines two heaps and a root into a new heap. For ease of discussion we assume that the array is indexed from 1 to $n$, and the left/right child of a node with array index $i$ have array indices $2i$ and $2i + 1$ respectively. We first set each key of the second half of the array (indexed from $n/2$ to $n$) as $n/2$ heaps, each has one node. Then we combine two of them and their parent into a heap of three nodes, and so on. If the root is *smaller* than the roots of *both* subtrees then we stop. Otherwise we exchange the root with the smaller root from the subtrees, and repeatedly heapify the subtree where the root has just been replaced. Next we heapify the key at $n/2 - 1$ and all the way back to the root (at index 1). The final result will be a binary minimum heap of $n$ nodes.

1. The minimum number of key comparisons is $\Theta(n)$.
2. The maximum number of key comparisons is $\Theta(n)$.
3. Since each heapify on a key may compare it with all the keys down to a leaf, its number of comparisons is no more than the height of the heap, which is $O(\log n)$. Also we have $O(n)$ keys to heapify, so the total number of key comparisons is $O(n \log n)$.
4. The number of key comparisons is in the same order as the sum of (*original, before heapified*) levels (as defined in the previous question, the distance to the root) of all keys.
5. The number of key comparisons is *maximized* if and only if the *largest* $n/2$ keys are in the *first* half of the array and in *decreasing* order.

### Problem 6

(3 points) A *randomized quick sort* works as follows. For ease of discussion we assume that the sequence we want to sort, $K = (k_1, \ldots, k_n)$, is a *permutation* of 1 to $n$. We randomly and uniformly pick a key $k$ from $K$. Then we partition $K$ into two subsets — $K_1$ that has keys less than $k$ and $K_2$ that has keys greater than $k$. Then we recursively sort $K_1$ and $K_2$, and combine the results with $k$ to get the sorted sequence.

1. The number of key comparisons will always be maximized when the keys in $K$ are already sorted.
2. Let $|K_1|$ and $|K_2|$ be the number of keys in $K_1$ and $K_2$ respectively. The expected value of $\max(|K_1|, |K_2|)$ is $\frac{2}{3}n$.
3. The algorithm will compare two keys $k_i$ and $k_j$ at most once, so the number of key comparisons is $O(n^2)$.
4. The probability that the algorithm will compare $k_i$ and $k_j$ ($n \geq i > j \geq 1$) is $\frac{2}{i - j + 1}$.
5. Let $P = \{(i, j) \mid 1 \leq i, j \leq n, i \neq j\}$. The expected total number of key comparisons is $\sum_{(i,j) \in P} \frac{1}{|k_i - k_j| + 1}$.

### Problem 7

(3 points) We can use a linked list to implement a stack. We assume that we use structure `Node` with two members to represent a node of the linked list. The member `data` stores the data, and the member `next` points to the next node in the linked list. Also we use a variable `head` to point to the *first* node of the linked list. `head` is initialized to `NULL`.

1. Pushing the value of a variable $i$ into the stack can be implemented as follows.

```c=
newHead = malloc(sizeof(Node));
newHead->data = i;
newHead->next = head;
head = newHead;
```

2. Popping the top of the stack into a variable $i$ can be implemented as follows.

```c=
free(head);
i = head->data;
head = head->next;
```

3. To test if the stack is empty we can check if the head is a `NULL` pointer.
4. We can improve the push/pop efficiency of this stack by adding another pointer `tail` that points to the *end* of the linked list, so we can access the *last* node in the list in $O(1)$ time.
5. We can improve the push/pop efficiency of this stack by adding another pointer member into every node, so it becomes a *double linked list*. That is, we can traverse in *both* directions in this linked list.

### Problem 8

(3 points) A *randomized* linked list sorting algorithm works as follows. We want to build a linked list in which the keys are in *increasing order*. That is, every node has a *smaller* key than its *successor* in the list. For ease of discussion we assume that the keys are *distinct* integers from 1 to $n$. The algorithm *randomly* picks a key from the remaining keys, and inserts it into the list. This process repeats until all keys are inserted. The inserted key $k$ will *skip* those at the *beginning* of the list that are *smaller* than it, and will *stop* at the first key $p$ that are *greater* than it. We then insert the key $k$ *before* $p$. To ensure that all keys will stop we assume that initially the list has only one key, $n + 1$. After we insert all keys we will have a sorted linked list from 1 to $n + 1$.

1. Every inserted key will stop exactly once.
2. The smallest key 1 will not skip any keys.
3. The largest key $n$ will always skip $n - 1$ keys.
4. The expected number of keys that the key $i$ will skip is $\Omega(i)$.
5. The key $i$ will skip $j$ if and only if $i > j$ and $i$ is inserted after $j$ is inserted, so the expected value of the total number of key comparisons is $\Theta(n^2)$.

### Problem 9

(3 points) A *binary search tree* is a tree where every node has at most *two* children. For ease of discussion we assume that every node has a *distinct* key. In addition, all keys in the left subtree are *smaller* than the key of root, and all keys in the right subtree are *larger* than the key of the root. A tree node is a *leaf* if it does *not* have any children. The *height* of the tree is the length of the *longest* path from the root to a leaf. The *successor* of a node $x$ is the node right *after* $x$ in increasing order, and the *predecessor* of a node $x$ is the node right *before* $x$ in increasing order.

1. We can locate the *smallest* key in a binary search tree in $O(h)$ time in the worst case, where $h$ is the height of the tree.
2. The height of a binary search tree of $n$ nodes is $O(\log n)$.
3. We can locate the *largest* key in a binary search tree in $O(\log n)$ time in the worst case, where $n$ is the number of the nodes in the tree.
4. Assume that a node $z$ has two children. We can remove $z$ while still maintaining the sorted order by locating its *successor* $y$, connecting $y$'s parent directly to the only child of $y$ (if there is one, otherwise make it null), which effectively removes the node $y$ from the tree, and replacing the key of $z$ with that of $y$.
5. Assume that a node $z$ has two children. We can remove $z$ while still maintaining the sorted order by locating its *predecessor* $y$, connecting $y$'s parent directly to the only child of $y$ (if there is one, otherwise make it null), which effectively removes the node $y$ from the tree, and replacing the key of $z$ with that of $y$.

### Problem 10

(3 points) A red-black tree is a binary tree where every node has a color (red or black), and has the following properties.

1. The root is black.
2. All paths from the root to a leaf have the same number of black nodes.
3. Every red node must have two black children.

For ease of discussion we assume that all null pointers (a special pointer to "nothing") point to a special *black* node. As a result all counting of the second property ends at this special node.

1. If we do *not* guarantee the first property, but still guarantee the second and the third properties, we will *not* be able to guarantee that the height of the tree is $O(\log n)$.
2. It is possible that there are *no* red nodes in a red-black tree of 100000 nodes.
3. We insert a key $k$ into a *non-empty* red-black tree just like into an ordinary binary search tree as a leaf, attach to it two null pointers to the special black node, and then immediately *stop* without any adjustment. If we color $k$ *red*, we may violate the second property above.
4. Consider the scenario above. If we color $k$ *red*, we may violate the third property above.
5. Consider the scenario above. If we color $k$ *black*, we will violate the second property above.

Answer the following questions in details.

### Problem 11

(5 points) Given an array of $n$ integers $A = (a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_n)$ ($n > 0$), you are asked to find the maximum and minimum elements with minimum comparisons. A simple solution is to iteratively compare each element with current max and min. It takes $2n$ comparisons in total.

(a) (3 points) Devise an algorithm that requires less than $1.67n$ comparisons.

(b) (2 points) How many comparisons does your algorithm take? Show your derivation.

### Problem 12

(15 points) There are $n$ stations along a coastal railway ($n > 0$). You're planning to select some of them to open cafes. Three arrays $S$, $L$ and $R$ have been given, including

- $S = (s_1, s_2, \ldots, s_n)$: the list of the stations from $s_1$ (first) to $s_n$ (last).
- $L = (l_1, l_2, \ldots, l_n)$: the locations of the stations, where $l_i$ is the distance of $s_i$ from the first station $s_1$. So $l_1 = 0$ and $l_n$ is the length of the railway. $l_1 < l_2 < \ldots < l_n$.
- $R = (r_1, r_2, \ldots, r_n)$: the revenues of the cafes, where $r_i$ ($> 0$) is the revenue for opening a cafe in $s_i$.

The only one constraint in your plan is that the distance of any pair of your selected stations should be longer than a given threshold $T$. If $s_i$ and $s_j$ ($i \neq j$) are selected, the total revenue would be $l_i + l_j$. Different selection leads to different total revenue. Given $S$, $L$, $R$ and $T$, your goal is to pick up a subset of the stations to maximize the total revenue under the constraint. Suppose that $f(n)$ returns the maximum total revenue for the cafes you select from the first $n$ stations. Please answer the following questions. No code is required (code will not be graded).

(a) (9 points) Give an $O(n^2)$ solution by defining a recurrence formula for $f(n)$. Clearly explain the meaning of your formula and why it can be computed in $O(n^2)$ time.

(b) (6 points) Consider the special case that the distance difference between two consecutive stations is 1, i.e., $l_{i+1} - l_i = 1$ ($1 \leq i \leq n - 1$). Give an $O(n)$ solution by defining a recurrence formula for $f(n)$. Clearly explain the meaning of your formula and why it can be computed in $O(n)$ time.

### Problem 13

(15 points) A disjoint-set data structure supports two operations. One is $\text{UNION}(x, y)$, which merges the two roots of the trees containing $x$ and $y$. The other is $\text{FIND}(x)$, which returns the root of the tree containing $x$. Union-by-height is a union heuristic, which keeps track of the heights of the trees to attach the shorter tree to the root of the taller tree.

(a) (9 points) Given an undirected graph $G = (V, E)$, where $V = \{v_1, \ldots, v_m\}$ ($m > 0$) and $E = \{e_1, \ldots, e_n\}$ ($n > 0$), devise an algorithm to check if the graph $G$ is a tree or not by using $\text{UNION}(v_i, v_j)$ with union-by-height and $\text{FIND}(v_k)$ with no path compression, where $v_i, v_j$ and $v_k \in V$. Clearly describe your solution and analyze the time complexity of your algorithm in the worst case. No code is required (code will not be graded).

(b) (6 points) The union-by-height heuristic prevents the height of a tree from growing linearly. Consider another heuristic, called union-by-descendant, which always attaches the tree with fewer descendants to the root of the tree with more descendants. Suppose that path compression is not applied. Which of the two heuristics is asymptotically better? Why?

### Problem 14

(20 points) A tree $T$ is assumed to be simple, undirected, and with **positive edge-weights**. Let $d_T(u, v)$ denote the distance between $u$ and $v$ on $T$. For a vertex $v$, the *eccentricity* of $v$ is the maximum of the distance to any vertex in the tree, i.e., $\max_{u \in V}\{d_T(v, u)\}$. The *diameter* of a tree is the maximum of the eccentricity of any vertex in the tree. (The term "diameter" is overloaded. It is defined as the maximum eccentricity and also as the path of length equal to the maximum eccentricity.) The *radius* of a tree is the minimum eccentricity among all vertices in the tree, and a *center* of a tree is a vertex with eccentricity equal to the radius.

(a) (5 points) Prove or disprove that there exists a tree with three different diameters and two centers.

(b) (5 points) Prove or disprove that there exists a tree with three centers.

(c) (10 points) Prove or disprove that any center of a given tree $T$ must lie in the diameter of $T$.

### Problem 15

(15 points) A Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP, pronounced *snip*) is a single nucleotide variation in the genome that recurs in a significant proportion of the population of a species. The patterns of *Linkage Disequilibrium* (LD) observed in the human population reveal a block-like structure. LD refers to the association that particular alleles at nearby sites are more likely to occur together than would be predicted by chance. The entire chromosome can be partitioned into high LD regions interspersed by low LD regions. The high LD regions are usually called "haplotype blocks," and the low LD ones are referred to as "recombination hotspots." Since there is little or no recombination within a haplotype block, these SNPs are highly correlated. Consequently, a small subset of SNPs, called tag SNPs or haplotype tagging SNPs, is sufficient to categorize the haplotype patterns of the block. It has been shown that we can recast the tag SNP selection problem as **Problem W**, which is, "Given a universal set $\mathcal{U} = \{u_1, u_2, \ldots, u_n\}$ and a family $\mathcal{F} = \{F_1, F_2, \ldots, F_m\}$ of subsets of $\mathcal{U}$, find a minimum-size subset $\widehat{C}$ of $\mathcal{F}$, such that every element of $\mathcal{U}$ belongs to at least one subset in $\widehat{C}$."

(a) (5 points) Prove or disprove that a greedy approach always delivers an optimal solution for **Problem W**.

(b) (10 points) Prove or disprove that **Problem W** is NP-complete.

## 110

本試卷共 20 題選擇題，作答於答案卡。每題答對 5 分，不答零分，答錯倒扣 2.5 分。

### Problem 1

When CAN the worst case of Quicksort occur? ______(1)
- $C_1$: Quick Sort where leftmost (or rightmost) element is always chosen as pivot
- $C_2$: leftmost element is chosen as pivot and array is already sorted in SAME order
- $C_3$: leftmost element is chosen as pivot and array is already sorted in REVERSE order

(A) $C_1$ (B) $C_2$ (C) $C_1$ and $C_2$ (D) $C_2$ and $C_3$

### Problem 2

A typical dynamic programming example is the snake sequence. Given a grid of numbers, find maximum length snake sequence and print it. A snake sequence is made up of adjacent numbers in the grid such that for each number, the number on the right or the number below it is $+1$ or $-1$ its value. For example, if you are at location $(x, y)$ in the grid, you can either move right i.e. $(x+1, y)$ if that number is $\pm 1$ or move down i.e. $(x, y+1)$ if that number is $\pm 1$. The length of a snake sequence is defined as the number of moves. Given the following grid (A matrix with $M$ rows and $N$ columns),

```
9, 6, 5, 2
8, 7, 6, 5
7, 3, 1, 6
1, 1, 1, 7
```

(a) The maximum LENGTH of snake sequence is ______(2)

(A) 6 (B) 7 (C) 5 (D) 4

(b) Time complexity of above solution is ______(3)

(A) $O(M \times N)$ (B) $O(M^2)$ (C) $O(N^2)$ (D) $O(M)$

(c) The last number of the maximum-length snake sequence is ______(4)

(A) 9(0,0) (B) 6(3,2) (C) 7(3,3) (D) 1(2,3) (E) 7(0,2)

(d) The third number of the maximum-length snake sequence is ______(5)

(A) 7(1,1) (B) 7(0,2) (C) 3(1,2) (D) 6(2,1) (E) 8(0,1)

### Problem 3

For questions with sequences, we constantly split the problem into a number of sub-problems that are smaller instances of the same problem, and we try to solve the smaller problems recursively. We called this type of algorithm ______(6)

(A) Dynamic programming (B) Divide and conquer (C) Greedy algorithms (D) Quicksort

### Problem 4

There is a large enough array $A$ with indices $p$ and $q$ which are initialized by 0, and functions $f(x)$ and $g()$ are defined as follows. Array $A$ and indices $p$ and $q$ can only be accessed in the functions $f(x)$ and $g()$.

$f(x)$
- $p \leftarrow p + 1$
- $A[p] \leftarrow x$

$g()$
- $x \leftarrow A[p]$
- $p \leftarrow p - 1$
- return $x$

(a) Which data structure is operated by those functions? ______(7)

(A) Queue (B) Stack (C) Hash (D) Heap

(b) If functions $f(x)$ and $g()$ are changed as following:

$f(x)$
- $A[q] \leftarrow x$
- $q \leftarrow q + 1$

$g()$
- $x \leftarrow A[p]$
- $p \leftarrow p + 1$
- return $x$

Which data structure is operated by those functions? ______(8)

(A) Queue (B) Stack (C) Hash (D) Heap

### Problem 5

There is a binary tree stored in an array as:

$$T[] = \{+, a, *, null, null, -, d, null, null, null, null, b, c\},$$

in which $T[i]$ is the parent of $T[2i + 1]$ and $T[2i + 2]$, where $i$ is an index and *null* means there is no element in the slot.

(a) What is its postorder traversal result? ______(9)

(A) $+a * -dbc$ (B) $a + b - c * d$ (C) $abc - d * +$ (D) $+a * -bcd$

(b) What is its BFS traversal result? ______(10)

(A) $+a * -dbc$ (B) $a + b - c * d$ (C) $abc - d * +$ (D) $+a * -bcd$

### Problem 6

There are 10 hexadecimal data, 53, 3B, 66, 43, 60, 5B, 7C, 14, 30, 37, inserted in the given order into an empty hash table. The table is implemented using a circular array of 10 slots, and one slot can only have one item. The hash function for the table is $h(k) = k \bmod 9$.

(a) Which data is the first one that occurs a collision? ______(11)

(A) 43 (B) 5B (C) 14 (D) 37

(b) If the hash table uses linear probing to resolve collisions and has no resizing mechanism, which position in the array is 37 inserted? ______(12)

(A) 3 (B) 8 (C) 4 (D) 0

### Problem 7

There is a linked-list with $n$ elements, which are $x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n$. Let $f(n)$ be the time complexity of inserting a new element $x_{n+1}$ to the tail of the list, and $g(n)$ be that of deleting the last element $x_n$. If there is only one pointer pointed to the head of the list, we know to access the list is time-consuming, and functions $f(n)$ and $g(n)$ are denoted as $f_1(n)$ and $g_1(n)$ in this case. To improve it, we may also add another pointer pointed to the tail of it, so the functions $f(n)$ and $g(n)$ become $f_2(n)$ and $g_2(n)$. Which of the following option is false if $n$ becomes large. ______(13)

(A) $\frac{f_1(n)}{g_1(n)} = 1$ (B) $\frac{f_2(n)}{g_2(n)} = n$ (C) $\frac{f_1(n)}{f_2(n)} = n$ (D) $\frac{g_1(n)}{g_2(n)} = 1$

### Problem 8

Given the following graph, try to find its minimum spanning tree.

=== 圖片描述：一張無向加權圖，共有九個節點 F、B、I、D、G、A、E、H、C。各邊與權重如下：F–B 權重 1；F–I 權重 5；F–D 權重 10；F–G 權重 17；B–D 權重 11；B–A 權重 6；B–C 權重 3；I–G 權重 18；I–H 權重 4；D–G 權重 16；D–E 權重 9；D–A 權重 12；G–E 權重 15；G–H 權重 19；A–E 權重 7；A–C 權重 13；E–H 權重 14；E–C 權重 8；H–C 權重 2。 ===

(a) What is the sixth edge that Kruskal's algorithm includes (the numbering of the inclusion order starts from 1, not 0)? ______(14)

(A) 6 (B) 7 (C) 8 (D) 9

(b) What is the sixth vertex that Prim's algorithm includes if starting from vertex A (the numbering of the inclusion order starts from 1, **not** 0)? ______(15)

(A) C (B) E (C) H (D) I

### Problem 9

What is the value of the maximum flow for the following $st$-flow network? ______(16)

(A) 16 (B) 17 (C) 18 (D) 19

=== 圖片描述：一張有向 $st$ 流量網路圖，節點有 s、A、B、C、D、t。各有向邊與容量如下：s→A 容量 10；s→C 容量 10；A→B 容量 4；A→C 容量 2；A→D 容量 8；C→D 容量 9；D→B 容量 6；B→t 容量 10；D→t 容量 10。（source 為 s，sink 為 t。） ===

### Problem 10

The Knuth-Morris-Pratt (KMP) algorithm is an string-matching algorithm. Its core is the prefix function. Given a pattern $P[1..m]$, the prefix function for the pattern $P$ is the function $\pi : \{1, 2, \ldots, m\} \rightarrow \{0, 1, \ldots, m - 1\}$. What is $\pi[7]$ for the following pattern $P$? ______(17)

(A) 4 (B) 5 (C) 6 (D) 7

```
 i   | 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
P[i] | a b a b a b a b c a
π[i] |
```

### Problem 11

Many string-matching algorithms build a finite automata. Below is a partially-completed state transition function for a string $s$ of length 10 over the alphabet $\{A, B, C\}$. It is possible to reconstruct $s$ from the partial table. How many A's does the string $s$ have? ______(18)

(A) 4 (B) 5 (C) 6 (D) 7

```
    0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9
A          4  5     2
B          0  0     7        3
C          0  0     0        10
```

### Problem 12

What can you infer from the facts that `PROBLEMA` is NP-complete and `PROBLEMA` linear-time reduces to `PROBLEMB`? ______(19)
- $C_1$: If there exists an $O(N^3)$ algorithm for `PROBLEMB`, then $P = NP$.
- $C_2$: If there does not exist an $O(N^3)$ algorithm for `PROBLEMB`, then $P \neq NP$.
- $C_3$: If there exists an $O(N^3)$ algorithm for `PROBLEMB`, then there exists an $O(N^3)$ algorithm for `PROBLEMA`.
- $C_4$: If there exists an $O(N^3)$ algorithm for `PROBLEMA`, then there exists an $O(N^3)$ algorithm for `PROBLEMB`.

(A) $C_1$ and $C_3$ (B) $C_1$ and $C_4$ (C) $C_2$ and $C_3$ (D) $C_2$ and $C_4$

### Problem 13

The VERTEX-COVER problem is to find a vertex cover of the size $k$ in a given graph $G$. In the SUBSET-SUM problem, given a finite set $S \subset \mathbb{N}$ and a target $t \in \mathbb{N}$, we ask whether there is a subset $S' \subseteq S$ whose elements sum to $t$. The VERTEX-COVER problem is polynomial-time reducible to the SUBSET-SUM problem. Given an instance $\langle G, k \rangle$ of the VERTEX-COVER problem, one can construct a corresponding instance $\langle S, t \rangle$ of the SUBSET-SUM problem. Given the following graph $G$ and $k = 3$, $\{v_1, v_3, v_4\}$ is the vertex cover of size $k = 3$. The corresponding set $S = \{1, 4, 16, 64, 256, 1040, 1041, 1093, 1284, 1344\}$ is constructed as the following table. What is the target $t$? ______(20)

(A) 2389 (B) 3417 (C) 3754 (D) 3758

=== 圖片描述：左側為一張無向圖 $G$，有五個節點 $v_0, v_1, v_2, v_3, v_4$，五條邊標為 $e_0, e_1, e_2, e_3, e_4$。邊的連接為：$e_0$ 連 $v_0$–$v_4$；$e_1$ 連 $v_4$–$v_1$；$e_2$ 連 $v_4$–$v_3$；$e_3$ 連 $v_4$–$v_2$；$e_4$ 連 $v_1$–$v_2$。

右側為 SUBSET-SUM 建構表，每列為一個集合元素，欄位為（以 4 為基底修改後的）$e_4, e_3, e_2, e_1, e_0$ 五個位元及其十進位值（decimal）：
- $x_0 = 1$：0 0 1 0 1 = 1041
- $x_1 = 1$：1 0 0 1 0 = 1284
- $x_2 = 1$：1 1 0 0 0 = 1344
- $x_3 = 1$：0 0 1 0 0 = 1040
- $x_4 = 1$：0 1 0 1 1 = 1093
- $y_0 = 0$：0 0 0 0 1 = 1
- $y_1 = 0$：0 0 0 1 0 = 4
- $y_2 = 0$：0 0 1 0 0 = 16
- $y_3 = 0$：0 1 0 0 0 = 64
- $y_4 = 0$：1 0 0 0 0 = 256
===

## 111

### Problem 1

(3 points) For each of the following algorithms in the next five problems, what is the tightest asymptotic upper bound for its runtime complexity for $n$ numbers? Please use the following table of (A)-(E) choices when answering.

| (A) | (B) | (C) | (D) | (E) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| $O(1)$ | $O(\lg n)$ | $O(n)$ | $O(n \lg n)$ | $O(n^2)$ |

Selection sort: expected time?

### Problem 2

(3 points) Merge sort: expected time?

### Problem 3

(3 points) `MAX_HEAPIFY` for a max-heap: expected time?

### Problem 4

(3 points) Quick sort: worst-case time?

### Problem 5

(3 points) Bucket sort when there are $\Theta(n)$ buckets: expected time?

### Problem 6

(5 points) Which of the following is NOT an in-place sorting algorithm (in their standard implementations)?

(A) bubble sort
(B) insertion sort
(C) merge sort
(D) heap sort
(E) all choices are in-place sorting algorithms

### Problem 7

(5 points) In a *max-heap* stored in an array, after these 6 numbers have been inserted in this exact sequence: 5, 4, 2, 6, 1, 3, what is the value of the node at index 2 (with the root being the node at index 1)?

(A) 1
(B) 2
(C) 4
(D) 5
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 8

(5 points) Following the previous problem, what is the value of the left child of the node with value 3?

(A) 1
(B) 2
(C) 4
(D) 5
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 9

(5 points) Consider an array of 8 elements being sorted using quicksort. It has just finished the first pass of partitioning and pivot swapping, thus changing the original array into the following array:

$$[7, 11, 16, 10, 17, 1, 18, 30]$$

How many elements could have been the pivot?

(A) 1
(B) 2
(C) 3
(D) 4
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 10

(5 points) Consider an integer array $A$ of size $n > 0$ with elements $A[1], \ldots, A[n]$, where the first $p$ elements are positive and the other $(n - p)$ elements are negative. The following algorithm calculates $p$ correctly by calling $\text{COMPUTE-P}(A, n)$. What loop invariant is maintained for the **while** loop of the algorithm?

```
COMPUTE-P(A, len)
1  if A[1] < 0 return 0
2  left = 1, right = len
3  while left < right
4      m = ceiling((left + right) / 2)
5      if A[m] > 0
6          left = m
7      else
8          right = m - 1
9  return left
```

(A) $left + 1 \leq p \leq right$
(B) $left + 1 \leq p \leq right - 1$
(C) $left \leq p \leq right$
(D) $left \leq p \leq right - 1$
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 11

(5 points) Consider a string of length $n$, e.g., cbaabcba. We want to add the smallest number of characters to the front of the string to make it a palindrome, e.g., abcbaabcba. This problem can be solved by first concatenating the string with its inverse with a delimiter #, e.g. cbaabcba#abcbaabc. Then, run the pre-processing routine of the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm on the new string $s_0 s_1 \cdots s_{2n}$ of length $(2n + 1)$ to get a failure function $f_s(j)$, which computes the length of the longest prefix of the string $s_0 s_1 \ldots s_j$ that is also a suffix. After running the pre-processing algorithm, how can we calculate the smallest number of characters that should be added to the front of the original string to make a palindrome?

(A) $n - f_s(n - 1) + 1$
(B) $n - f_s(n)$
(C) $n - \max_{0 \leq j \leq n-1} (f_s(j))$
(D) $n - \max_{n+1 \leq j \leq 2n} (f_s(j))$
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 12

(5 points) Which of the following statement has been proved to be true?

(A) An NP problem of size $n$ must take more than $poly(n)$ time to solve.
(B) Any NP problem is polnomial-reducible to any NP-complete problem.
(C) Any NP-complete problem is polnomial-reducible to any NP problem.
(D) If an NP-complete problem can be solved by an approximation algorithm with ratio 2, any other NP-complete problem can also be solved by an approximation algorithm with a constant ratio.
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 13

(5 points) Consider a hash table with $f(n)$ entries with a hash function that can uniformly dispatch items to those entries. Which property below ensures that a successful search can be done in $O(1)$?

(A) $f(n) = O(\sqrt{n})$
(B) $f(n) = O(n)$
(C) $f(n) = \Omega(\sqrt{n})$
(D) $f(n) = \Omega(n)$
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 14

(5 points) Consider a red-black tree with $n$ internal nodes, where $n$ is even. At most how many of them can be a black node with one red child?

(A) $\frac{n}{2}$
(B) $n$
(C) $\lfloor \log_2(n + 1) \rfloor - 1$
(D) $\lfloor \log_2(n + 1) \rfloor$
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 15

(5 points) In the red-black tree with 26 nodes that reaches the solution of the problem above, what is the maximum height of the tree? A tree with one node is assumed to have height 1.

(A) 5
(B) 6
(C) 7
(D) 8
(E) 9

### Problem 16

(5 points) Dynamic programming can be used to solve the matrix-chain multiplication problem. Suppose we hope to compute the matrix product $A_1 A_2 \ldots A_6$ with the matrix dimensions as follows.

| matrix | $A_1$ | $A_2$ | $A_3$ | $A_4$ | $A_5$ | $A_6$ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| dimension | $30 \times 35$ | $35 \times 15$ | $15 \times 5$ | $5 \times 10$ | $10 \times 20$ | $20 \times 25$ |

Let $m[i, j]$ be the minimum number of scalar multiplications needed to compute the matrix $A_i A_{i+1} \ldots A_j$. What is $m[2, 5]$?

(A) 4375
(B) 7125
(C) 5375
(D) 8500
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 17

(5 points) What is the time complexity of finding the minimum number of scalar multiplications needed for $A_1 A_2 \ldots A_n$ using dynamic programming?

(A) $O(n^{2.5})$
(B) $O(n^3)$
(C) $O(n^2)$
(D) $O(n)$
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 18

(5 points) When using Dijkstra's algorithm to solve the single-source shortest problem for a graph having $V$ vertices and $E$ edges, which is INCORRECT?

(A) The search principle is breadth-first.
(B) It is a greedy algorithm.
(C) When using an array to implement the min-priority queue, the time complexity is $O(V^2)$.
(D) For a dense graph where $E = \Theta(V^2)$, the algorithm can run in $O(V^2)$ when using the binary min-heap to implement the min-priority queue.
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 19

(5 points) Consider the following undirected graph $G$. Let $T$ be the minimum spanning tree (MST) of the graph. Which is INCORRECT?

=== 圖片描述：一張無向加權圖，共有七個節點 $V_1, V_2, V_3, V_4, V_5, V_6, V_7$，其中 $V_1$ 位於中央。各邊與權重如下：$V_4$–$V_3$ 權重 20；$V_4$–$V_5$ 權重 21；$V_4$–$V_1$ 權重 1；$V_3$–$V_1$ 權重 3；$V_3$–$V_2$ 權重 14；$V_5$–$V_1$ 權重 36；$V_1$–$V_2$ 權重 8；$V_5$–$V_6$ 權重 28；$V_1$–$V_6$ 權重 25；$V_1$–$V_7$ 權重 16；$V_2$–$V_7$ 權重 2；$V_6$–$V_7$ 權重 15。 ===

(A) Edge $(V_1, V_4)$ is in $T$
(B) Edge $(V_4, V_5)$ is in $T$
(C) Let $w_{4,5}$ be the weight of $(V_4, V_5)$. If we decrease $w_{4,5}$ by 16 (i.e., $w_{4,5}$ becomes 5), then $T$ remains to be the MST of $G$
(D) Let $w_{2,3}$ be the weight of $(V_2, V_3)$. If we decrease $w_{2,3}$ by 10 (i.e., $w_{2,3}$ becomes 4), then $T$ remains to be the MST of $G$
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 20

(5 points) Given a graph $G = (V, E)$ with the adjacent matrix $W = w_{ij}$ with $W$ an $n \times n$ matrix. The following algorithm can compute the All-Pairs Shortest Path of $G$.

```
FLOYD-WARSHALL'(W)
1  D = W
2  for k = 1, 2, ..., n
3      for i = 1, 2, ..., n
4          for j = 1, 2, ..., n
5              d_ij = min(d_ij, d_ik + d_kj)
```

What is the SPACE complexity of this algorithm?

(A) $\Theta(n^2)$
(B) $\Theta(n^3)$
(C) $\Theta(n)$
(D) $\Theta(n^4)$
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 21

(5 points) When using the Edmonds-Karp algorithm to find the maximum flow of a flow network $G = (V, E)$, which is CORRECT?

(A) The time complexity is $O(E|f^*|)$, where $f^*$ denotes a maximum flow in the network.
(B) The algorithm uses the depth-first search principle.
(C) The time complexity is $O(VE^2)$.
(D) The time complexity is $O(VE|f^*|)$.
(E) none of the other choices

### Problem 22

(5 points) Consider a fractional knapsack problem of 6 items. The $i$-th item is worth $v_i$ dollars and weights $w_i$ pounds.

| item $i$ | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ponds $w_i$ | 4 | 2 | 8 | 5 | 5 | 8 |
| dollors $v_i$ | 3 | 8 | 16 | 7 | 9 | 20 |

Suppose that at most $W = 20$ pounds can be carried in the knapsack. The sequence of picking the items is

(A) 2, 6, 3, 5
(B) 2, 6, 5, 3
(C) 2, 6, 5, 4, 3
(D) 6, 3, 5, 2, 4
(E) none of the other choices

## 112

本試卷有 14 題選擇題（題號 1-14），第 4,5,7 題為單選題，其他選擇題為複選題。單選題該題答對得 5 分，答錯倒扣 1 分，未答者得 0 分。複選題每個選項單獨計分，選項答對者得 1 分，選項答錯者倒扣 0.5 分，另若該題整題未作答者，整題得 0 分。選擇題請於答案卡上作答。另有 2 題非選擇題（題號 15-16），請於試卷本上作答。

**Multiple Choice Problems (70 points, 5 points for each problem)**

### Problem 1

Assuming we have $n$ data points. Among the variant characteristics of the data points, please select the correct descriptions.

(A) If the worst-case running time is the most important, *merge sort* can be a good choice with $O(n \log n)$ time.
(B) If the input happens to be sorted already, *bubble sort* can be a best choice with $O(n)$ time.
(C) If the input array is in random order and the average sorting time is most important, *quick sort* can be a good choice with $O(n \log n)$ time.
(D) If the exchanges of the items in the array are very expensive, *selection sort* will incur the least "swaps" or "moves".
(E) If the input array consists of integers in the range $1 \ldots n^k$, *radix sort* with radix $n$ with $O(k \log n)$ time.

### Problem 2

B+ tree is an extension of B tree. The major differences from B tree are (1) all leaf nodes are linked together in a doubly-linked list, and (2) data points are stored on the leaf nodes only; internal nodes only hold keys and act as routers to the correct leaf node; the left child is smaller than the key and the right child is larger or equal than that. Please find any/all violations of a B+ tree structure in the following diagram. Assume the tree node can at most contain 4 data points (keys).

=== 圖片描述：一棵 B+ 樹圖，部分節點以虛線框標示選項標籤 (A)-(E)。

根節點為 `20`。根有左右兩個子節點：左子為 `10`（標示為 (A)），右子為 `30,40`。

`10` 節點（A）有兩個子節點：`6,8` 與 `13,20`（`13,20` 標示為 (B)）。
`30,40` 節點有三個子節點：`22,27`、`33,36`、`47,52`。

葉層（由左至右）：`1,2,3`、`6,7`、`8,9`（掛在 `6,8` 下）；`10,11`、`13,14`、`20,21`（`20,21` 標示為 (C)）（掛在 `13,20` 下）；`22,23`（標示為 (D)）、`24,25`、`27,28`（掛在 `22,27` 下）；`30,31`（標示為 (E)）、`33,34`、`36,37`（掛在 `33,36` 下）；`40,43`、`47,49`、`52,55`（掛在 `47,52` 下）。 ===

### Problem 3

Please find the following table for the characters and their corresponding occurring probabilities. Please design a Huffman encoding tree and select the correct descriptions.

| Symbol ($X$) | A | B | C | D | E | F | G |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Prob ($X$) | 0.15 | 0.06 | 0.24 | 0.21 | 0.09 | 0.21 | 0.03 |

(A) The codeword length for symbol C is 3
(B) The codeword length for symbol G is 5
(C) The codeword length for symbol E is 5
(D) The codeword length for symbol A is 4
(E) none of above is correct

### Problem 4

（單選）We now use several algorithms to traverse a binary tree. Assuming there are a total number of $N$ nodes, how many of the following statements about the **worst-case space complexity** are TRUE?
- Using DFS to traverse a balanced binary tree takes $O(N)$.
- Using DFS to traverse a binary tree takes $O(N)$.
- Using BFS to traverse a balanced binary tree takes $O(N)$.
- Using BFS to traverse a binary tree takes $O(N)$.

(A) 0 (B) 1 (C) 2 (D) 3 (E) 4

### Problem 5

（單選）In a traditional merge sort, two sorted sub-arrays are combined to form a single, fully sorted array. This is referred to as a *2-way merge*. The problem at hand is to extend this concept by merging $N$ sorted arrays of integers, where $N$ and $M$ are given integers representing the number of arrays and the number of integers in each array, respectively. Please choose the correct **worst-case time complexity** of this $N$-way merge.

(A) $O(N \log M)$ (B) $O(NM \log M)$ (C) $O(N^2 \log M)$ (D) $O(NM \log N)$ (E) none of the above is correct.

### Problem 6

The following is a binary tree and the alphabet on the node is simply the "name" (instead of value) of the node. Please select the correct statements from the following:

=== 圖片描述：一棵二元樹，節點以字母命名。根為 A。A 的左子為 B、右子為 C。B 的左子為 D、右子為 E；C 的左子為 F、右子為 G。D 的右子為 H（D 無左子）；E 的左子為 I（E 無右子）；F 的左子為 J（F 無右子）；G 的左子為 K、右子為 L；L 的右子為 M（L 無左子）。 ===

(A) The successor of node B is E.
(B) The successor of node A is C.
(C) The tree is not a AVL tree.
(D) If we remove node J, the result is an AVL tree.
(E) If we remove node H, the result is an AVL tree.

### Problem 7

（單選）Given a list of binary trees $T = \{t_1, t_2, \ldots, t_7\}$ where each node is 0 or 1 shown as below, we would like to insert these trees into a **linear-probing hash table** of length $N = 11$. The hash function $f(t) = g(h(t)) \bmod N$, where $h(t)$ is the binary sequence obtained from *in-order* traversal of tree $t$ and $g(\cdot)$ converts a binary sequence to a decimal number. For instance, $g("1111111") = 127$. Here's the question: how many collisions occur during the insertion process?

=== 圖片描述：七棵滿二元樹（每棵 7 個節點，每個節點值為 0 或 1），依層序（root，左子，右子，及四個葉）列出各樹的節點值：
- $t_1$：root=0；左=0、右=1；葉（左至右）=0,1,1,0。
- $t_2$：root=0；左=0、右=1；葉=0,1,1,0。
- $t_3$：root=1；左=0、右=1；葉=0,1,1,1。
- $t_4$：root=1；左=0、右=0；葉=0,1,1,0。
- $t_5$：root=0；左=0、右=0；葉=0,1,1,1。
- $t_6$：root=1；左=0、右=0；葉=1,0,1,0。
- $t_7$：root=1；左=1、右=1；葉=0,1,1,0。
===

(A) 0 (B) 1 (C) 2 (D) 3 (E) 4

### Problem 8

**Postfix advantages**: What is/are the advantage(s) of using postfix notation for math expressions?

(A) No need to use parentheses
(B) No need to consider precedence of operators
(C) Easier for human to read
(D) Easier for computers to evaluate
(E) More concise when compared with prefix notation

### Problem 9

**DFS advantages**: To find a feasible solution to the eight-queen problem, what is/are the reason(s) that we prefer to use DFS (depth-first search) instead of BFS (breadth-first search)?

(A) DFS is more memory efficient.
(B) DFS can be implemented using a stack.
(C) DFS usually reaches the terminal states of "good" or "bad" faster.
(D) DFS is conceptually simpler than BFS.
(E) BFS cannot be implemented using a stack.

### Problem 10

**Heap applications**: Which one(s) of the following applications may involve the use of heaps to increase time efficiency?

(A) Find the k largest numbers from a given stream of numbers.
(B) Given a stream of numbers coming one after another, calculate the median of the currently received set of numbers.
(C) Compute the page rank of a given set of web pages
(D) Detect appropriate "buy" and "sell" requests to create transactions in stock market
(E) Identify the next timing for collisions in event-driven simulation for molecular dynamics

### Problem 11

**Properties of dynamic programming (DP)**: Which of the following statements is/are correct about DP?

(A) Any DP problem can be visualized as the optimal path finding problem.
(B) Once a DP problem is solved, all the related sub-problems are also solved.
(C) Once a DP problem is solved, it is straightforward to obtain the second-best solution.
(D) The optimal solution of a DP problem can be obtained using optimal solutions of its sub-problems.
(E) A DP problem has overlapping sub-problems which are reused several times when solving the original problem.

### Problem 12

**Properties of shortest path problem**: Which of the following statements is/are correct?

(A) Dijkstra's algorithm can be applied to any directed graph with no negative cycle.
(B) The heap data structure is likely to be used in Dijkstra's algorithm.
(C) Floyd-Warshall algorithm can be applied to any directed graph with negative weights.
(D) Floyd-Warshall algorithm is based on the concept of dynamic programming.
(E) Every shortest path in a weighted directed graph $G$ will not change if an extra weight is added on every edge of $G$

### Problem 13

**Properties of min. spanning tree (MST)**: Let $T$ be a MST of a weighted graph $G$ with at least 3 vertices. Which of the following statements is/are correct?

(A) Given an edge $e$ in $G$ but not in $T$, we can form a cycle by putting $e$ to $T$. Then $e$ has the largest weight among edges in $C$.
(B) If we partition $G$ into two subsets, and let $e$ be the smallest-weight edge across the partition. Then $e$ belongs to some MST in $G$.
(C) The edge with the smallest weight in $G$ must belong to some MST of $G$.
(D) The edge with the second smallest weight in $G$ must belong to some MST of $G$.
(E) The edge with the third smallest weight in $G$ must belong to some MST of $G$.

### Problem 14

**Prefix, infix, and postfix**: Which of the following statements is/are correct?

(A) We can use a stack to convert an infix to postfix expression.
(B) We can use a stack to convert a postfix to an infix expression.
(C) We can derive a binary tree from its infix and prefix notations.
(D) We can derive a binary tree from its infix and postfix notations.
(E) We can derive a binary tree from its prefix and postfix notations.

**Short Answer Problems (30 points)**

### Problem 15

**(21 points)** Given $k$ singly linked lists, each of which has $n$ nodes. The numbers in the nodes of the $i$-th list are given by $a_{i,1}, a_{i,2}, \ldots, a_{i,n}$, as shown in the figure below. Each of the $k$ lists has the numbers sorted in non-decreasing order, i.e., $a_{i,1} \leq a_{i,2} \leq \cdots \leq a_{i,n}$, where $i$ is the index of the list. Professor Q asks the students to develop an algorithm to merge these k lists into one singly linked list sorted in non-decreasing order. Three students have come up with different algorithms, which are given below in pseudo code.

=== 圖片描述：$k$ 條單向鏈結串列（singly linked list）的示意圖。list 1 由 head 指向節點序列 $a_{1,1} \to a_{1,2} \to a_{1,3} \to \cdots \to a_{1,n}$（最後節點的 next 為 NULL）；list 2 由 head 指向 $a_{2,1} \to a_{2,2} \to a_{2,3} \to \cdots \to a_{2,n}$；以此類推至 list k 由 head 指向 $a_{k,1} \to a_{k,2} \to a_{k,3} \to \cdots \to a_{k,n}$。每條串列皆為非遞減排序。 ===

Student A:

```
L1.  Create an empty singly linked list S to collect the result.
L2.  DO
L3.      Iterate over the numbers in the head nodes of the k lists, and find
         the node with the smallest number, denoted as node M.
L4.      Remove node M from the original list, and insert it into the result
         list S from the tail.
L5.  UNTIL all original k lists are empty
L6.  Return the result list S, which contains all nodes from the original k
     lists and sorted in non-decreasing order.
```

Student B:

```
L1.  Create an empty singly linked list S to collect the result.
L2.  Create an empty min heap H.
L3.  Remove the k head nodes from the k lists and insert them into H. Each
     node in H also contains the index number i of the list where it is from.
L4.  DO
L5.      Remove the min node M from the heap. Insert this node into S from
         the tail. Take note of the index number stored in M, denoted as m.
L6.      If list m is not empty, remove the head node from list m and insert
         it into H.
L7.  WHILE H is not empty
L8.  Return the result list S, which contains all nodes from the original k
     lists and sorted in non-decreasing order.
```

Student C:
Call the recursive divide-and-conquer function MergeTwoGroupLists (*k sorted linked lists*). The return value of the function is a list containing all nodes from the original $k$ lists and sorted in non-decreasing order.

```
L1.  Function MergeTwoGroupLists (m sorted linked lists)
L2.      If m==1 then return the only list from the input.
L3.      Divide the input m lists into two groups of lists, with ceil(m/2) and floor(m/2)
         lists, respectively.
L4.      Recursively call MergeTwoGroupLists for each of these two groups of
         lists, merging the first group of the lists into one sorted list, S1, and the
         second group of the lists into one sorted list, S2.
L5.      Merge the two sorted lists S1 and S2 into one sorted list S.
L6.      Return S.
```

For each of these three algorithms, analyze and give their asymptotic worst-case running times with **the big-O notation** and **in terms of $k$ and $n$**.

Note:
- Lower-order terms and constant factors (excluding $k$ and $n$) should be removed in the big-O notation in the answer.
- The bound in the answer needs to be tight.
- Only the final result will be graded and only fully correct answers will be given points. Please clearly mark your final result in the answer sheet.

### Problem 16

**(9 points)** The pseudo code function to compute the prefix function in the Knuth-Morris-Pratt (KMP) string matching algorithm is given below. Given a pattern string $P[1..m]$, the prefix function for this pattern $P$ is the function $\pi : \{1, 2, \ldots, m\} \rightarrow \{0, 1, \ldots, m - 1\}$ such that $\pi[q]$ is the length of the longest prefix of P that is a proper suffix of $P_q$, where $P_q$ denotes the $q$-character prefix of the string $P$. For pattern string $P = \text{ABACABACABACABAD}$, how many times is **line 7** executed? (Note: only the final answer will be graded and only fully correct answer will be given points)

```
COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION(P)
1   m = P.length
2   let π[1..m] be a new array
3   π[1] = 0
4   k = 0
5   for q = 2 to m
6       while k > 0 and P[k + 1] != P[q]
7           k = π[k]
8       if P[k + 1] == P[q]
9           k = k + 1
10      π[q] = k
11  return π
```

## 113

本試題有 12 題選擇題（題號 1-12）。第 3 題及第 6 題為單選題，其餘為複選題。單選題答對得 5 分，答錯倒扣 1 分，未答者得零分。複選題每個選項單獨計分，選項答對者得該題五分之一分數，選項答錯者倒扣該題十分之一分數，另若該題整題未作答者，整題得 0 分。選擇題請於答案卡上作答。另有一題非選擇題（題號 13），請於試卷本上作答。

### Problem 1

(5 points) Consider the following variation of the Selection Problem: Given a sequence $S = \langle a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_n \rangle$ of $n$ distinct integers and two positive integers $x$ and $y$, where each number in $S$ falls between 1 and $y$, the goal is to report the smallest $x$ numbers in $S$ in ascending order. This scenario assumes the conventional single-processor, random access machine (RAM) model, with a machine word size of at least $\lceil \log y \rceil$ bits. To tackle this problem, five algorithms have been proposed. Please select the correct description(s) below.

A. Algorithm A: The algorithm initializes an empty max-heap and sequentially inserts numbers from $S$. During insertion, if the size of the max-heap exceeds $x$, it removes the maximum element from the heap. Finally, the remaining numbers in the heap are sorted by heapsort and reported. If $x \leq n / \log n$, Algorithm A runs in $O(n)$ time in the worst case.

B. Algorithm B: The algorithm initially constructs a min-heap and proceeds to extract the minimum element $x$ times. If $x \leq n / \log n$, Algorithm B runs in $O(n)$ time in the worst case.

C. Algorithm C: The algorithm begins by performing a base-$n$ radix sort, followed by reporting the smallest $x$ values. If $y \leq n^2$, Algorithm C runs in $O(n)$ time in the worst case.

D. Algorithm D: The algorithm performs a counting sort by allocating an array $C$ of length $y$, traversing through $S$ and incrementing $C[a_i]$ for each $a_i$. It finally reports the smallest $x$ values by scanning through the counter array. If $y \leq n^2$, Algorithm D runs in $O(n)$ time in the worst case.

E. Algorithm E: The algorithm first applies quickselect, i.e., Randomized-Select, to determine the $x$-th smallest number in $S$. Subsequently, it traverses $S$ for extracting all numbers smaller than or equal to the $x$-th smallest number. Finally, these $x$ numbers are sorted by quicksort and reported. The time complexity of Algorithm E is $O(n + x \log x)$ in expectation.

### Problem 2

(5 points) A Maximum Binary Tree (abbreviated as MaxBT) is defined as a binary tree that adheres to the max-heap property without the necessity of following the complete binary tree property. In a MaxBT, each node $p$ consists of a value (`p.data`) and two links (`p.left` and `p.right`) pointing to the left and right children, respectively. A link to nil indicates the absence of further children.

The provided pseudocode, although incomplete, implements a recursive function for merging two MaxBTs into a single MaxBT. This function takes the root nodes of the two MaxBTs (*root1* and *root2*) as input and returns the root node of the merged MaxBT.

```
1:  function MergeMaxBinaryTrees(root1, root2)
2:      if root1 = nil then return ___(a)___ end if
3:      if root2 = nil then return ___(b)___ end if
4:      if root1.data > root2.data then
5:          ___(c)___ ← MergeMaxBinaryTrees( ___(d)___ , ___(e)___ )
6:          return ___(f)___
7:      else
8:          ___(g)___ ← MergeMaxBinaryTrees( ___(h)___ , ___(i)___ )
9:          return ___(j)___
10:     end if
11: end function
```

Assuming all the blanks in the above function have been appropriately filled to ensure its proper functioning, please select the correct description(s) below.

A. (b) and (f) are the same.
B. (c), (d), and (e) are all distinct.
C. In the cases of (c) and (g), each has only one correct answer.
D. Exchanging the filled content of (h) and (i) leads to a correct implementation.
E. The function works correctly even when the two arguments passed into it refer to the same tree.

### Problem 3

(5 points) A Dynamic Array (abbreviated as DArray) is a type of array that permits the insertion and deletion of elements at the end to dynamically adjust its size. DArray $D$ maintains three crucial attributes, including the underlying array `D.data`, the logical data size `D.size`, and the actual array capacity `D.capacity`. The invariant `D.size` $\leq$ `D.capacity` holds at any given moment. The Insert($D$, $x$) operation appends the element $x$ to the end of `D.data`. In case `D.size` = `D.capacity`, it triggers a call to Resize($D$) before appending $x$, where Resize($D$) allocates a new and larger array, moves all the data to it, increases the value of `D.capacity`, sets up `D.data`, and finally frees the old array. Two implementations of Resize($D$) are provided: ResizeA($D$) increases `D.capacity` by a constant (e.g., 10) while ResizeB($D$) doubles `D.capacity` each time.

To initialize DArray $D$, we set `D.size` to 0, `D.capacity` to 1, and allocate a size 1 array to `D.data`. Assuming that both allocating and freeing arrays of length $n$ take $O(n)$ time, and moving a single element takes $O(1)$ time, please select the correct description(s) below.

A. DArray is not suitable for random access because its memory may be relocated.
B. DArray can only be allocated in the heap memory due to its dynamic memory nature.
C. If ResizeA($D$) is considered, the amortized time complexity of Insert($D$, $x$) is $O(1)$.
D. If ResizeB($D$) is considered, the amortized time complexity of Insert($D$, $x$) is $O(1)$.
E. In the Delete($D$) operation, if `D.size` > 0, `D.size` is decreased by one. If, at this stage, `D.size` < $\lceil$ `D.capacity`/2 $\rceil$, we create a new array $d'$ with a size of $\lceil$ `D.capacity`/2 $\rceil$, transfer the data to $d'$, set up $d'$ as the new data array for `D.data`, and subsequently free the old array. Then, the amortized time complexity of mixed Insert and Delete operations can be $O(1)$, where Resize($D$) can be either ResizeA($D$) or ResizeB($D$).

### Problem 4

(10 points) Consider a hash function $h$ that maps numerous keys into an array $A$, indexed from 0 to $n - 1$. The concern is that excessive collisions arising from the hashed keys can potentially cause inefficiency within the hash table. The following pseudocode, while not complete, implements a function that utilizes the divide-and-conquer strategy to identify the case where strictly more than half of the keys share the same hash value. The function takes the hash function $h$ and the subarray $A$ with the index range from *low* to *high* as input and returns the majority hash value shared by over $\lfloor (high - low + 1)/2 \rfloor$ keys. If the keys stored in the subarray $A[low..high]$ do not have such a majority hash value, the function returns $-1$.

```
1:  function FindMajorityHashValue(h, A, low, high)
2:      if low = high then return h(A[low]) end if
3:      mid ← floor((low + high) / 2)
4:      leftMajority ← FindMajorityHashValue(h, A, low, mid)
5:      rightMajority ← FindMajorityHashValue(h, A, mid + 1, high)
6:      leftCount ← CountElement(A, low, high, leftMajority)
7:      rightCount ← CountElement(A, low, high, rightMajority)
8:      _______________________________________
9:  end function
```

In the pseudocode, CountElement($A$, *low*, *high*, *val*) calculates and returns the count of keys in the subarray $A[low..high]$ whose hashed values are equal to the given *val*. Please select the correct description(s) below.

A. If *leftMajority* = *rightMajority* = $-1$, $A[low..high]$ may still have a majority hash value.
B. If $A[low..high]$ has a majority hash value and *rightMajority* = $-1$, the function should return *leftMajority*.
C. If *leftCount* = *rightCount*, the function should return $-1$.
D. Suppose that an implementation of CountElement runs within $\Theta(\ell)$ time, where $\ell = high - low + 1$. The time complexity of FindMajorityHashValue can be $O(n \log n)$.
E. Suppose that a magical implementation of CountElement runs within $\Theta(\ell / \log \ell)$ time, where $\ell = high - low + 1$. The time complexity of FindMajorityHashValue can be $O(n)$.

### Problem 5

(10 points) A Binary Search Tree (abbreviated as BST) is a tree structure comprised of nodes that maintain a specific order among their keys. Given a single node $x$ and two BSTs $L$ and $R$, in which $l.key < x.key < r.key$ for all nodes $l \in L$ and $r \in R$, the objective is to design a $\text{Join}(L, x, R)$ function that integrates the given input into a unified BST $T$ with the nodes $L \cup \{x\} \cup R$. Be aware that AVL and Red-Black trees are specific types of BSTs. Given the constraint that $T$, $L$, and $R$ must share the same type, they are required to be either all BSTs, all AVL trees, or all Red-Black trees.

The $\text{Join}(L, x, R)$ function is implemented with the steps: (1) selecting a subtree $T'$ from either $L$ or $R$, where a subtree is defined as potentially being empty, a portion, or the entire tree, (2) detaching $T'$, (3) attaching $T'$ under the node $x$, (4) attaching the other tree (which does not contain $T'$) under $x$, and (5) re-attaching the tree rooted at $x$ to the former parent of $T'$. The modified tree is then returned as $T$. If $T'$ has no former parent, the tree rooted at $x$ is simply returned as $T$. The following figure demonstrates an example result of $\text{Join}(L_1, x_1, R_1)$, where the letters $\alpha, \beta, \gamma, \delta$, and $\eta$ denote arbitrary subtrees. Inside a circle, the value represents the key of a node.

=== 圖片描述：$\text{Join}(L_1, x_1, R_1)$ 範例圖。

輸入：$L_1$ 為根節點 2，其左子樹為 $\alpha$、右子樹為 $\beta$。$x_1$ 為單一節點 4。$R_1$ 為根節點 10，其左子為節點 8、右子樹為 $\eta$；節點 8 的左子樹為 $\gamma$、右子樹為 $\delta$（以虛線框標示以節點 8 為根、含 $\gamma, \delta$ 的子樹為所選的 $T'$）。

輸出 $T$：根為節點 10，其右子樹為 $\eta$，左子為節點 4；節點 4 的左子為節點 2（其左子樹 $\alpha$、右子樹 $\beta$），右子為節點 8（其左子樹 $\gamma$、右子樹 $\delta$）。 ===

Please note that almost all steps, except for (1), have been finalized — there could be multiple ways to choose $T'$ in (1). The tree returned from $\text{Join}(L, x, R)$ may not be unique. Additionally, unlike AVL or Red-Black trees, $\text{Join}(L, x, R)$ does not perform re-coloring and re-balancing. Consider the following arguments passed into $\text{Join}(L_2, x_2, R_2)$. All nil nodes (considered as leaves in red-black trees) are omitted for brevity.

=== 圖片描述：$\text{Join}(L_2, x_2, R_2)$ 的輸入。

$L_2$：根為節點 2，左子為節點 1、右子為節點 3。
$x_2$：單一節點 4。
$R_2$：根為節點 10。節點 10 的左子為 7、右子為 13。節點 7 的左子為 5、右子為 9；節點 5 的右子為 6；節點 9 的左子為 8。節點 13 的左子為 11、右子為 15；節點 11 的右子為 12；節點 15 的左子為 14、右子為 16；節點 16 的右子為 17。 ===

Please select the correct description(s) below.

A. If no additional balance is required for $L_2$ and $R_2$, i.e., both $L_2$ and $R_2$ are BSTs, there are 6 possible tree shapes that could be returned from $\text{Join}(L_2, x_2, R_2)$.
B. If both $L_2$ and $R_2$ are AVL trees as observed, among all possible tree shapes returning from $\text{Join}(L_2, x_2, R_2)$, there is a unique tree that is an AVL tree.
C. There are multiple ways to assign colors to the nodes in $R_2$ to make $R_2$ a red-black tree.
D. There exists a color assignment to all nodes in $L_2 \cup \{x_2\} \cup R_2$ such that: (1) both $L_2$ and $R_2$ are red-black trees, (2) a red-black tree can be returned from $\text{Join}(L_2, x_2, R_2)$, and (3) the node with the key 4 is BLACK.
E. There exists a unique color assignment to all nodes in $L_2 \cup \{x_2\} \cup R_2$ such that: (1) both $L_2$ and $R_2$ are red-black trees, (2) a red-black tree can be returned from $\text{Join}(L_2, x_2, R_2)$, and (3) the node with the key 1 is BLACK.

### Problem 6

(5 points) We want to multiply a sequence of matrices $M_1, \ldots, M_n$ with the minimum number of multiplications. Since the matrix multiplication is associative, we can parenthesize the matrix multiplication in all possible orders. Let $m_{i,j}$ be the minimum number of multiplications to multiply $M_i, \ldots, M_j$. We can derive a recursion of $m_{i,j}$, where $r_i$ and $c_i$ are the numbers of rows and columns of the matrix $M_i$ respectively.

$$m_{i,j} = \min_{i \leq k < j} (m_{i,k} + m_{k+1,j} + r_i c_k c_j) \tag{1}$$

Now consider $m_{s,s+k}$, $1 < s < s + k < n$. For given $s$ and $k$, let $x$ be the number of $m_{i,j}$'s that have $m_{s,s+k}$ at the right hand side of Equation 1, and let $y$ be the number of different $m$'s that are at the right-hand side of Equation 1 when $i = s$ and $j = s + k$. What is the approximate value of $x + y$?

A. $s\binom{n-k}{2}$
B. $n + k$
C. $(n - s)(n - s - k)$
D. $\binom{k}{2} + \binom{n}{2}$
E. $\binom{n-k-s}{2} + \binom{k}{2}$

### Problem 7

(5 points) When we compute all $m_{i,j}$'s with Equation 1, we must follow an order of $i$ and $j$ so that the $m$'s on the right-hand side are all known when we compute $m_{i,j}$. Please select all the correct orders in the following choices.

A. decreasing order of $i + j$
B. increasing order of $i + j$
C. increasing order of $(i - j)^2$
D. decreasing order of $(i - j)^3$
E. increasing order of $|(i + j)(i - j)|$

### Problem 8

(5 points) We define the height of a tree to be the maximum number of edges from the root to a leaf. We also define the level of a node $v$, denoted as $l(v)$ to be the height of the subtree rooted at $v$. Which of the following descriptions is correct?

A. If $v$ is a leaf, then $l(v) = 1$.
B. If $v$ is an internal node, $l(v) = \max_{s \in S} l(s)$, where $S$ is the set of children of $v$.
C. We can compute $l(v)$ by starting a breadth-first-search (BFS) from $v$, traversing all nodes of the subtree rooted at $v$, and computing the maximum distance to a leaf as $l(v)$. Since there are no more than $n$ $v$'s and each BFS takes $O(n)$ time, the total time complexity is $O(n^2)$
D. We can compute the levels for all nodes by a depth-first-search (DFS) starting from the root of $T$. That is, we can compute the level of an internal node $v$ after we compute the $l$ values of all children of $v$.
E. Since there are $n$ tree nodes to visit, the DFS from the root takes $O(n)$ time.

### Problem 9

(5 points) We have a binary tree $T$ and for every node $v \in T$, we want to compute the new height if we select $v$ as the new root.

We consider the effect of making $v$ the new root. First, the height of the subtree of $v$ is still $l(v)$. Second, since $v$ is now the new root, it could go up to its parent and then to the farthest leaf. We define this distance as $r(v)$.

A. The new tree after selecting a new root is always a binary tree.
B. The height of the tree after making $v$ the new root is $\max(l(v), r(v))$.
C. We can compute $r(v)$ for all tree node $v$'s in a top-down manner. We assume that the $r$ value of $v$'s parent in $T$ is known, so $v$ only needs to consider the $r$ value of its parent and the $l$ value of its sibling in $T$, in order to compute its own $r$.
D. The $r$ value of the root of $T$ is 1.
E. We can compute the $r$ values for all nodes in $O(n)$ time.

### Problem 10

(5 points) Consider a sequence of numbers $(v_1, \ldots, v_n)$. Now we remove $k$ numbers from the sequence so that we have $k + 1$ non-empty segments of numbers. For example, consider $(2, 3, 8, 1, 4)$. If we remove 8 then we have two segments $(2, 3)$ and $(1, 4)$.

Now we want to minimize the maximum sum of numbers of a segment. Let $m(1, n, k)$ be the answer, then what is the correct recursion for $m$ when $1 \leq i < j \leq n$ and $0 < k \leq (j - i)/2$?

A. $m(i, j, k) = \min_{x=i}^{j} \max(\sum_{y=x}^{j} v_y, m(i, x, k - 1))$
B. $m(i, j, k) = \min_{x=i+1}^{j-1} \max(\sum_{y=x+1}^{j} v_y, m(i, x, k - 1))$
C. $m(i, j, k) = \min_{x=i+1}^{j-1} \max(m(x + 1, j, k - 1), \sum_{y=i}^{x-1} v_y)$
D. $m(i, j, k) = \min_{v+w=k-1, v,w \geq 0} \min_{x=i+1}^{j-1} (\max(m(i, x - 1, v), m(x + 1, j, w)))$
E. $m(i, j, k) = \min_{v+w=k-1, v,w \geq 0} \min_{x=i}^{j} (\max(m(i, x, v), m(x, j, w)))$

### Problem 11

(5 points) Which of the following descriptions is true for the previous problem?

A. We can always find an optimal solution that removes one of the largest $v$.
B. We can always find an optimal solution that does not remove one of the smallest $v$.
C. The initial value for $m(i, i, 0)$ is $v_i$.
D. The initial value for $m(i, j, k)$ when $k > (j - i)/2$ is 0.
E. The initial value for $m(i, i + 2, 1)$, $1 \leq i \leq n - 2$ is $\max(v_i, v_{i+2})$.

### Problem 12

(5 points) Consider a directed acyclic graph $G = (V, E)$ of $n$ tasks where every node is a task and every edge is a dependency. If there is an edge from a task $v$ to another task $w$, that means we need to finish $v$ before starting $w$. We have $p$ processors of the same capability and every processor can finish any task in one unit of time.

We define a schedule function $s$ to map a task $v$ to a positive integer time step $s(v)$. Since we have only $p$ processors, so the system can only process at most $p$ tasks in one time step. Also, a schedule needs to respect the dependency of edges.

A. For every positive integer $i$, $|\{v \mid s(v) \leq i\}| \leq p$.
B. If there is a path $(v_{i_1}, \ldots, v_{i_k})$ in $G$, then $s(v_{i_j}) < s(v_{i_k})$ for $1 \leq j \leq k$.
C. The number of time steps required is at least $\min(\lceil n/p \rceil, L)$, where $L$ is the number of tasks along the longest path in $G$.
D. Without loss of generality, we can always assume $s(v) = 1$ for all $v$'s without incoming edges.
E. If the number of processors is infinite, then we can finish all tasks in $L$ time steps, where $L$ is the number of tasks along the longest path in $G$.

### Problem 13

(30 points) A vertex cover of an undirected graph $G = (V, E)$ is a subset $V' \subseteq V$ such that if $(u, v) \in E$, then either $u \in V'$ or $v \in V'$ (or both). The size of a vertex cover is defined as the number of vertices in it. The vertex-cover problem is to find a vertex cover of minimum size in a given undirected graph. It has been shown to be NP-hard, thus we cannot find a polynomial-time algorithm for solving it exactly unless NP = P. Fortunately, some polynomial-time approximation algorithms have been proposed for solving the vertex-cover problem.

The following two approximation algorithms take as input an undirected graph and compute a vertex cover for it. Initially, all edges in the graph are uncovered for both Algorithm VC-Arbitrary and Algorithm VC-Max-Degree. Once a vertex $v$ is put into the cover, all edges incident on $v$ are covered and removed.

Algorithm VC-Arbitrary picks an arbitrary uncovered edge $(u, v)$, puts both $u$ and $v$ into the cover, throws out all edges incident on either $u$ or $v$, and repeats the process until there are no uncovered edges left.

Algorithm VC-Max-Degree picks a vertex $v$ that covers the most number of uncovered edges, puts $v$ into the cover, throws out all edges incident on $v$, and repeats the process until there are no uncovered edges left.

(a) (10 points) Give an example for which Algorithm VC-Arbitrary yields a solution that is at least double the size of a minimum-size vertex cover. Give another example for which Algorithm VC-Max-Degree will definitely yield a solution with the size more than that of a minimum-size vertex cover no matter how it breaks the tie. Each example should contain no more than ten vertices. You have to justify your solution by showing the vertex cover found by the algorithm and its corresponding minimum-size vertex cover.

(b) (10 points) Prove or disprove that Algorithm VC-Arbitrary has a smaller ratio bound than Algorithm VC-Max-Degree. The ratio bounds in your proof or disproof should be as tight as possible.

(c) (10 points) In the weighted vertex-cover problem, you are given an undirected graph $G = (V, E)$ and a weight $w(v)$ for each vertex $v \in V$, and the objective is to find a vertex cover (covering all edges in $E$) of minimum total weight. In other words, the goal is to find a vertex cover $C$ of $G$ such that $\sum_{v \in C} w(v)$ is minimized among all possible vertex covers of $G$. You are required to formulate the weighted vertex cover problem as an integer linear program.

## 114

本試卷共 17 題選擇題及 2 題非選擇題。選擇題每題有 5 個選項，第 1-7 題為單選題，第 8-17 題為複選題。單選題每題答對 5 分，不答或答錯為 0 分。複選題每題 5 分，每個選項單獨計分，選項答對者得 1 分，選項答錯者得 0 分。另若複選題整題未作答者，整題得 0 分。選擇題作答於答案卡，非選擇題（第 18 及 19 題）請作答於試卷本。

### Problem 1

(5 points) Consider the following randomized algorithm, which prints out some number of exclamation marks (!) and some number of asterisks (*). Assume that the size of A is $n$ initially. What are the expected numbers of !'s and *'s that the algorithm prints out? Choose the tightest possible answers.

```
RandomizedPrint(A):
    n = length(A)
    if n <= 1:
        print "!"
        return
    for i in {0,...,n-1}:
        print "*"
    Choose a uniformly random integer p in {1,...,n-1}
    RandomizedPrint(A[:p])
    RandomizedPrint(A[p:])
```

(A) !: $O(\log n)$, *: $O(n \log n)$
(B) !: $O(\log n)$, *: $O(n^2)$
(C) !: $O(n)$, *: $O(n \log n)$
(D) !: $O(n)$, *: $O(n^2)$
(E) !: $O(n \log n)$, *: $O(n^2)$

### Problem 2

(5 points) Which of the following statements about the Akra-Bazzi theorem is correct?

(A) It can only be applied to recurrences where all subproblems have equal size.
(B) It requires that the function $g(n)$ in the recurrence satisfies a polynomial growth condition.
(C) It always produces a closed-form solution for the recurrence.
(D) It is less general than the Master Theorem for solving recurrences.
(E) The value of $p$ in the theorem must always be an integer.

### Problem 3

(5 points) Consider the following five DNA sequences:
- a) `ATCGTA`
- b) `ATCGTT`
- c) `GCATAG`
- d) `GCATAC`
- e) `TTAGCG`

Which of the following statements is correct regarding the application of a c-means clustering algorithm to these sequences ($c = 3$)?

(A) The algorithm will always halt with exactly three clusters regardless of the chosen distance metric.
(B) Using Hamming distance as the similarity measure, sequences a and b will always be in the same cluster.
(C) The algorithm guarantees finding the globally optimal clustering solution for these sequences.
(D) Using k-mer frequency vectors ($k = 2$) as features, sequences c and d will never be in the same cluster.
(E) The time complexity of the k-means algorithm for clustering these sequences is $O(n)$, where $n$ is the number of sequences.

### Problem 4

(5 points) Consider two protein sequences $A$ and $B$ of lengths $m$ and $n$ respectively. You are tasked with implementing a dynamic programming algorithm to find the optimal global alignment between these sequences. Given the following definitions:
- A match score of $+2$ for identical amino acids.
- A mismatch penalty of $-1$ for different amino acids.
- A gap penalty of $-2$ for each gap introduced.

Which of the following statements is correct regarding the dynamic programming solution for this alignment problem?

(A) The time complexity of the algorithm is $O(m + n)$.
(B) The space complexity of the algorithm is $O(mn)$.
(C) The recurrence relation for the optimal alignment score $S(i, j)$ at position $(i, j)$ in the dynamic programming matrix is:
$$S(i, j) = \max\{S(i-1, j-1) + \text{match}(A[i], B[j]), S(i-1, j) - 2, S(i, j-1) - 2\}.$$
(D) The traceback procedure to reconstruct the optimal alignment always starts from the top-left corner of the dynamic programming matrix.
(E) The algorithm guarantees finding all possible optimal alignments between the two sequences.

### Problem 5

(5 points) Many graph theory can be used to find the number of a chemical structure; a possible one can be used according to the following steps:
- a) Represent the molecule as an undirected graph $G = (V, E)$, where $V$ is the set of vertices and $E$ is the set of edges (bonds).
- b) Initialize each vertex $v \in V$ with a value equal to its degree (number of incident edges).
- c) For a fixed number of iterations or until convergence:
  - a. For each vertex $v$, compute a new value as the sum of the current values of its neighbors (not including itself).
  - b. Update all vertex values simultaneously.
- d) After the iterations, sort the vertices based on their final values in non-increasing order, tie breaking with smaller labels.

Consider the following 2-Carboxyoxybenzoic acid structure represented as a graph (Numbers in parentheses are temporary labels for reference, not the final numbering.):

=== 圖片描述：2-Carboxyoxybenzoic acid 的分子結構圖，以原子為節點、鍵結為邊；括號內數字為暫時標號（節點編號）。

原子與鍵結如下（C 表碳，O 表氧；雙鍵在此圖中仍視為一條邊）：
- 頂端有一個羧基：C(11) 以雙鍵接 O(12)，以單鍵接 O(13)。
- C(11) 向下接 C(10)。
- C(10) 為苯環上的一個碳，苯環由六個碳組成：C(10)–C(9)–C(8)–C(7)–C(6)–C(5)–C(10)（六員環）。
- 苯環上的 C(5) 接 O(4)（酯/醚氧）。
- O(4) 接 C(3)。
- C(3) 以雙鍵接 O(2)，以單鍵接 O(1)。

即節點集合為 {C(3), C(5), C(6), C(7), C(8), C(9), C(10), C(11), O(1), O(2), O(4), O(12), O(13)}，共 13 個節點。各節點度數（相鄰邊數）依上述鍵結計算。 ===

Apply the above algorithm for two iterations to this graph. What is the correct ordering of the vertices after these iterations?

(A) 5, 6, 10, 11, 9, 4, 3, 7, 8, 12, 13, 1, 2
(B) 5, 10, 11, 9, 3, 6, 4, 7, 8, 12, 13, 1, 2
(C) 5, 6, 10, 11, 9, 3, 4, 7, 8, 12, 13, 1, 2
(D) 5, 10, 11, 9, 6, 3, 4, 7, 8, 12, 13, 1, 2
(E) None of the above choices.

### Problem 6

(5 points) Consider a knapsack with capacity 17 and five types of items, each with its size and value listed below. All items are available in unlimited quantities and each item can be selected more than once. The goal is to maximize the total value of the items placed in the knapsack. If the maximum value of the knapsack is $10a + b$ where $a$ and $b$ are integers in $\{0, 1, 2, \cdots, 9\}$, what is the value of $a + b$?

| item | A | B | C | D | E |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| size | 3 | 4 | 7 | 8 | 9 |
| value | 4 | 5 | 10 | 11 | 12 |

(A) 3 (B) 4 (C) 5 (D) 6 (E) 7

### Problem 7

(5 points) Max-flow algorithms can be applied to determine the elimination of sports teams in a group. Consider the following record for a group of five teams. Note that the number of remaining games for a team does not necessarily equal the number of remaining games against the group's rivals, as teams may play opponents outside their own group. Only the team with the highest number of wins will advance to the next round. Our goal is to determine whether team E has already been eliminated.

The intuition behind constructing the graph is to assume that team E wins all of its remaining 28 ($r_E$) games, and then attempt to ensure that the number of wins for each competing team does not exceed the total possible wins of team E ($w_E + r_E = 76$). The constructed graph consists of 12 nodes: in addition to the source ($s$) and sink ($t$) nodes, there are six nodes representing the head-to-head games between teams A-D and four nodes representing teams A-D. What is the maximum flow value of the constructed graph?

| Team | Wins ($w_i$) | Losses ($l_i$) | To play ($r_i$) | vs A | vs B | vs C | vs D | vs E |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| team A | 75 | 59 | 28 | - | 5 | 7 | 4 | 3 |
| team B | 71 | 63 | 28 | 5 | - | 2 | 4 | 4 |
| team C | 69 | 65 | 28 | 7 | 2 | - | 4 | 0 |
| team D | 63 | 71 | 28 | 4 | 4 | 4 | - | 0 |
| team E | 48 | 86 | 28 | 3 | 4 | 0 | 0 | - |

(A) 22 (B) 23 (C) 24 (D) 25 (E) 26

### Problem 8

(5 points) Select all pairs of functions in the increasing order of growth. That is, select $g_1, g_2$ if $g_2$ grows faster than $g_1$.

$$f_1(n) = \binom{n}{5}, \quad f_2(n) = 2^{\log^4 n}, \quad f_3(n) = \binom{n}{n-4}, \quad f_4(n) = \sqrt{2^{\sqrt{n}}}, \quad f_5(n) = n^{5(\log n)^2}.$$

(A) $f_1(n), f_3(n)$
(B) $f_2(n), f_5(n)$
(C) $f_2(n), f_4(n)$
(D) $f_4(n), f_5(n)$
(E) $f_1(n), f_5(n)$

### Problem 9

(5 points) Select all the correct statement(s) from the following statements regarding recurrence.

(A) The solution to the recurrence $T(n) = 2T(n/2) + \Theta(n)$ is $\Theta(n^2)$.
(B) The solution to the recurrence $T(n) = 7T(n/2) + \Theta(n^2)$ is $\Theta(n^{\lg 7})$.
(C) The solution to the recurrence $T(n) = \log n + T(\sqrt{n})$ is $\Theta(\log n)$.
(D) The solution to the recurrence $T(n) = 2^n T(n-1)$ is $\Theta((\sqrt{2})^{n^2 + n})$. (Assume $T(n) = 1$ for $n$ smaller than some constant $c$.)
(E) The solution to the recurrence $T(n) = T(n/6) + T(7n/9) + O(n)$ is $O(n)$. (Assume $T(n) = 1$ for $n$ smaller than some constant $c$.)

### Problem 10

(5 points) Select all the correct statement(s) from the following statements regarding binary trees and binary search trees.

(A) Every binary tree is a binary search tree.
(B) Every binary search tree on $n$ nodes has height $O(\log n)$.
(C) In a binary search tree, we can find the next smallest element to a given element in $O(1)$ time.
(D) Let $A_1, A_2$, and $A_3$ be three sorted arrays of $n$ distinct real numbers. Constructing a balanced binary search tree of the set $A_1 \cup A_2 \cup A_3$ requires $O(n)$ time.
(E) Let $T$ be a complete binary tree with $n$ nodes. Finding a path from the root of $T$ to a given vertex $v \in T$ using breadth-first search takes $\Omega(n \lg n)$ time.

### Problem 11

(5 points) Let $S$ be a collection of $n$ objects, each with a unique integer key $a_i \in \{0, 1, 2, \ldots, n^2 - 1\}$. Consider hashing all the objects in $S$ into an array $A[0..m - 1]$ of $m = \lceil n^{1.5} \rceil$ buckets. Each bucket stores a (singly) linked list of all objects hashed into the same bucket. The hashing algorithm works as follows. The algorithm first picks a hash function $h$ uniformly at random from a hash family $\mathcal{H}$. Then, for each object $i \in S$, the algorithm computes $h(a_i)$ and inserts the object into the bucket $A[h(a_i)]$. The *number of collisions* $\tau$ is defined to be the total number of (unordered) object pairs hashed into the same bucket. We focus on the choice of the hash family $\mathcal{H}$ and the worst-case expected number of collisions $\mathbf{E}[\tau]$. Note that the term worst-case refers to the choice of the input set $S$. Select all statement(s) that are correct for every sufficiently large $n$.

(A) If $\mathcal{H}$ is a uniform hash family, then $\mathbf{E}[\tau] = O(\sqrt{n})$.
(B) If $\mathcal{H}$ is a universal hash family, then $\mathbf{E}[\tau] = O(\sqrt{n})$.
(C) If $\mathcal{H} = \{h(x) = (ax + b) \bmod m \mid a, b \in \mathbb{Z} \text{ and } 0 \leq a, b \leq m - 1\}$, then $\mathbf{E}[\tau] = O(\sqrt{n})$.
(D) If $\mathcal{H} = \{h(x) = (x^2 + x + c) \bmod m \mid c \in \mathbb{Z} \text{ and } 0 \leq c \leq m - 1\}$, then $\mathbf{E}[\tau] = O(\sqrt{n})$.
(E) The hash family described in (C) is a universal hash family.

### Problem 12

(5 points) Let $G = (V, E, w)$ be an undirected, weighted, simple, and connected graph. Let $T_1$ and $T_2$ be two minimum spanning trees of $G$. Define the set of edges $F \subseteq E$ as all edges that are in either $T_1$ or $T_2$ but not in both. Suppose that $F \neq \emptyset$. Select all correct statement(s) below.

(A) The subgraph $H = (V, F)$ is a disjoint union of cycles and paths.
(B) All edges in $F$ have the same weight.
(C) There is no edge in $F$ that has a unique weight.
(D) There exists a graph $G$ such that $w(F) > w(T_1)$.
(E) Consider the problem MOST-DISTANT-MSTs, which seeks two minimum spanning trees $T_1$ and $T_2$ in order to maximize $w(F)$ on $G$. Assume P $\neq$ NP. Then MOST-DISTANT-MSTs is NP-hard.

### Problem 13

(5 points) Consider the (incomplete) pseudocode snippet SOLVE().

```
1:  function SOLVE(G = (V, E, w), s, t)
2:      P = V                                    ▷ Initializes a set with all vertices.
3:      Set A[s] = 0 and A[x] = ∞ for all x ≠ s. ▷ Initializes an array A.
4:      while P ≠ ∅ do
5:          x = argmin_{x∈P}{A[x]}               ▷ Chooses a vertex.
6:          P = P - {x}                          ▷ Removes the vertex.
7:          for each y ∈ P such that (x, y) ∈ E, do
8:              _____(*)_____
9:      return _____(**)_____
```

You have realized that this code snippet can be used to solve different problems by filling the blanks in different ways. Here are three problems we consider:
- In the ST-DISTANCE problem, you are given a graph $G$ with non-negative weights, and two vertices $s, t \in V$. The goal is to compute the shortest distance between $s$ and $t$.
- In the ST-BOTTLENECK problem, you are given a graph $G$ with non-negative weights, and two vertices $s, t \in V$. The goal is to compute the smallest possible weight *wgt* such that there exists at least one path from $s$ to $t$ using only edges whose weights are less than or equal to *wgt*.
- In the MST problem, you are given an undirected, weighted, and connected graph $G$. The goal is to compute the total weight of a minimum spanning tree.

Select all correct statement(s) below.

(A) To solve ST-DISTANCE, we fill $(\star)$ with $A[y] = A[x] + w(x, y)$, and we fill $(\star\star)$ with $A[t]$.
(B) To solve ST-BOTTLENECK, we fill $(\star)$ with $A[y] = \max\{A[y], \min\{A[x], w(x, y)\}\}$, and we fill $(\star\star)$ with $A[t]$.
(C) To solve MST, we fill $(\star)$ with $A[y] = \min\{A[y], w(x, y)\}$, and we fill $(\star\star)$ with $A[t]$.
(D) The code snippet can be implemented with Fibonacci heaps, so there exist algorithms with running time $O(|E| + |V| \log |V|)$ for all three problems stated above.
(E) The value $A[t]$ will always be non-negative in any correct implementation for solving any of the problems stated above.

### Problem 14

(5 points) Let $G$ be an $n \times n$ grid graph, with each undirected edge having a certain weight. Specifically, the vertices of $G$ can be labeled as $(i, j)$ where $1 \leq i, j \leq n$. There is an edge between $(i, j)$ and $(k, \ell)$ if and only if $|i - k| + |j - \ell| = 1$. Suppose we want to compute the *value* of a minimum cut that separates $(1, 1)$ and $(n, n)$. The value of a cut is defined as the sum of weights to all edges crossing the cut.

Four students proposed different ideas for solving this task. Let us examine their approaches and select all correct statement(s) below.

(A) Student A: Some minimum cut must cut through at most $2n$ edges. Since there are $2n(n-1) \leq 2n^2$ edges in $G$, we can design a brute force algorithm that enumerates at most $\sum_{k=1}^{2n} \binom{2n^2}{k}$ subsets of edges and check: if the removal of those edges separates $(1, 1)$ and $(n, n)$. Any such subset leads to a candidate for the minimum cut.

(B) Student B: For some minimum cut, the crossing edges must form a monotonic path from $(n, 1)$ to $(1, n)$. In other words, those edges form a path of exactly $2n - 2$ edges from $(n, 1)$ to $(1, n)$. Thus, we can solve this problem via dynamic programming.

(C) Student C: Why don't we simply computes a maximum flow and then turning it to a minimum cut? First, construct a flow network by letting $(1, 1)$ be the source and $(n, n)$ be the sink. For each undirected edge connecting $(i, j)$ and $(k, \ell)$, create two directed edges in opposite directions, both with capacities equal to that edge's weight. By using Dinitz's (Dinic's) algorithm, the maximum flow from $(1, 1)$ to $(n, n)$ can be computed in $O(n^6)$. Using the Max-Flow Min-Cut Theorem, the returned maximum flow value equals the value of the minimum cut.

(D) Student D: To separate $(1, 1)$ and $(n, n)$, for some minimum cut, the crossing edges must form a shortest path from the south-west border $WS := \{(i, 1) \mid 1 < i \leq n\} \cup \{(n, j) \mid 1 \leq j < n\}$ to the north-east border $NE := \{(i, n) \mid 1 \leq i < n\} \cup \{(1, j) \mid 1 < j \leq n\}$. Thus, we can run the Bellman-Ford algorithm that seeks for any shortest path from a vertex in $WS$ to any vertex in $NE$. Finally, the length of the shortest path is the value of the minimum cut.

(E) None of the above choices.

### Problem 15

(5 points) In this problem we use the following notations. For any binary tree $T$, we define $T.x$ to be its root node, $T.l$ (resp. $T.r$) to be the left (resp. right) child of $T.x$, and $T.L$ (resp. $T.R$) to be the left (resp. right) subtree of $T.x$. For any vertex $x$ on a binary tree, we define $x.l, x.L, x.r$, and $x.R$ similarly. These values are defined as $\perp$ (empty) if they do not exist. The set of leaves of $T$ are denoted as $\text{Leaf}(T)$. For any statement $P$ we define $[\![P]\!]$ to be 1 if $P$ is true and 0 if $P$ is false.

Let $T$ be a binary tree of $n$ nodes. Each node $v$ on $T$ has a weight $w(v)$ and a color $c(v)$. We want to make the tree colorful in the sense that every non-root tree node has a color different from its parent. To do so, some re-coloring to the tree nodes are necessary, and we would like to minimize the total weights of the tree nodes that are re-colored. Notice that there are infinitely many colors to choose so once a node is re-colored it gets a unique color. Let $f(T)$ be the answer. Suppose that both $T.L$ and $T.R$ are non-empty. What is the correct recursive formulations for $f(T)$? Select all choice(s) that apply.

(A) Let $T' \subseteq T$ be the (partial) binary tree consisting of all tree node $v$ who has the same color as the tree root $T.x$ and all $v$'s ancestors have the same color $c(T.x)$ too. Then, $f(T) = g(T') + \sum_{a \in \text{Leaf}(T')} (f(a.L) + f(a.R))$, here $g(T')$ is the weight of the maximum weighted independent set on $T'$.

(B) With the same notion $T'$ defined above, $f(T) = h(T') + \sum_{a \in \text{Leaf}(T')} (f(a.L) + f(a.R))$, here $h(T')$ is the weight of the minimum weighted vertex cover on $T'$.

(C) With the same notion $T'$ defined above, $f(T) = h(T') + \sum_{a \in \text{Leaf}(T')} (f(a.L) + f(a.R))$, here $h(T')$ is the weight of the minimum weighted dominating set on $T'$.

(D) $f(T) = \min\{f(T.L) + f(T.R) + w(T.x), [\![c(T.l) == c(T.x)]\!] \cdot (w(T.l) + f(T.L)) + [\![c(T.l) \neq c(T.x)]\!] \cdot f(T.L) + [\![c(T.r) == c(T.x)]\!] \cdot (w(T.r) + f(T.R)) + [\![c(T.r) \neq c(T.x)]\!] \cdot f(T.R)\}$

(E) None of the above choices apply.

### Problem 16

(5 points) Consider the following 0-1 integer linear program $P$:

$$
\begin{align*}
\text{maximize } \quad & 2 \cdot x_1 + 0 \cdot x_2 + 2 \cdot x_3 + 5 \cdot x_4 \\
\text{subject to } \quad & 2x_1 + x_2 + 3x_3 + 4x_4 \leq 8 \\
& 4x_1 + x_2 + 2x_3 + 3x_4 \leq 8 \\
& x_1 + 8x_2 + x_3 + 7x_4 \leq 8 \\
& x_1, x_2, x_3, x_4 \in \{0, 1\}
\end{align*}
$$

Let $\alpha$ be the number of feasible solutions to $P$. Let $\beta$ be the number of optimal solutions to $P$. Let $\gamma$ be the integrality gap. Let $P'$ be the relaxed linear program of $P$. Let $\nu_4$ be the four-dimensional volume of the convex polytope that consists of all feasible solutions to $P'$. Let $\nu_3$ be the three-dimensional volume of the convex polyhedron that consists of all optimal solutions to $P'$. Select all correct statement(s) below.

(A) $\alpha = 8$ (B) $\beta \neq 1$ (C) $\gamma = 1$ (D) $\nu_4 < 1$ (E) $\nu_3 = 0$

### Problem 17

(5 points) Let $A, B, C, D, E$ be decision problems. We denote a polynomial time reduction with the symbol "$\leq_p$". Suppose that $A \leq_p B$, $B \leq_p C$, $C \leq_p D$, and $C \leq_p E$. We also assume $A \in$ P and $B \in$ NP. Select all correct statement(s) below.

(A) If $A$ is NP-hard, then $B \in$ P.
(B) If $B$ is NP-hard and $E \leq_p B$, then $C$ is NP-complete and $D$ is NP-hard.
(C) If $C$ is NP-complete, then both $D$ and $E$ are NP-complete.
(D) If $D \in$ NP, then $C \in$ NP.
(E) If $E$ is NP-hard, then $C$ is NP-hard.

### Problem 18

(5 points) Consider the task of incrementing a $k$-bit binary counter from all zeroes to all ones. Let $A$ be an array of length $k$ that simulates the counter, where $A[0]$ represents the least significant bit and $A[k - 1]$ represents the most significant bit. We implement the INCREMENT() operation as follows:

```
function INCREMENT()
    i = 0
    while A[i] == 1 do
        A[i] = 0
        i = i + 1
    A[i] = 1
```

Unfortunately, this counter is implemented on a deficient random access machine (RAM). On this machine, each read-access to a single array entry takes 1 unit of time. However, a write to an entry may take different amount of time. In particular, for any index $i$ ($0 \leq i < k$), if $i$ is a multiple of 3 but not a multiple of 5, the memory stick will fizz and it will take exactly $3^{i/3}$ units of time to write the data into $A[i]$. If $i$ is a multiple of 5 but not a multiple of 3, the memory stick will buzz and it will take exactly $5^{i/5}$ units of time to write the data into $A[i]$. Writing into all other entries not mentioned above takes 1 unit of time as usual.

Please design a potential function $\Phi(A)$ such that the amortized time (using $\Phi(A)$) per INCREMENT() operation is still $O(1)$ when incrementing from zero. Make sure your potential function is rigorously defined, can be evaluated into an actual number by human beings, and is as clean and clear without ambiguity. For example, if you left any undetermined variable (such as "for some constant $c$") in your expression, you **must** state an actual number for that variable (e.g., "$c = 1$"). You do **not** need to verify your answer in the answer sheet. This problem has no partial score.

### Problem 19

(10 points) Consider the following decision problem ODDNUMBERSUM:

> **ODDNUMBERSUM**
> **Input:** A set of positive odd numbers $S$. A target odd number $k$.
> **Question:** Is there an odd number of elements in $S$ whose sum is exactly $k$?

(a) (5 points) Prove that ODDNUMBERSUM is NP-complete.

(b) (5 points) For any set of numbers $T$ we define $\text{sum}(T)$ to be the sum of all numbers in $T$. Let $S$ and $k$ be the input from ODDNUMBERSUM. Define $k^* = \max\{\text{sum}(T) \mid T \subseteq S \text{ and } \text{sum}(T) \leq k\}$ be the largest possible subset sum among all subsets whose sum does not exceed $k$.

Let $\varepsilon > 0$ be any sufficiently small constant. Give an algorithm that computes an $(1 - \varepsilon)$-approximate solution to $k^*$. Specifically, your algorithm should output a value $k_{\text{ALG}}$ such that $(1 - \varepsilon)k^* \leq k_{\text{ALG}} \leq k^*$. The running time of your algorithm should be a polynomial of $|S|$ and $1/\varepsilon$. State the algorithm as concisely and percisely as possible. You should **not** write anything besides the algorithm.

